PersUbiquitComput(2004)8:82–91
DOI10.1007/s00779-004-0265-z
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Carmine Ciavarella Æ Fabio Paterno`
The design of a handheld, location-aware guide
for indoor environments
Received:5December2003/Accepted:10March2004/Publishedonline:27April2004
(cid:1)Springer-VerlagLondonLimited2004
Abstract Because of the growing spread of mobile and mobility of the users and the availability of interaction
small devices (like PDAs, mobile phones, etc.), modalities unfettered by mouse and keyboards: voice,
designers and developers of interactive systems have to sound, gesture, and user position can also be used to
consider user mobility and the dynamic context of use. interact with a system. Location-aware systems can be
In this paper we discuss the design criteria we have roughly grouped by the type of environment where
defined for developing handheld location-aware sys- they are used: indoor or outdoor. They differ not only
tems for indoor environments. We analyse some of the in the features of the environment (noise, light, number
technologies currently available for this purpose and of people, and so on) but also in the technology
examine how to use them in order to obtain location- exploited to detect user position: usually GPS for
dependent information. We report on our experience in outdoor environments; various technologies for in-
designing a location-aware guide for museum visitors doors. In this paper, we discuss the lessons learnt in
and identify possible design criteria for this type of designing a handheld location-aware system for indoor
system, which uses automatic detection of a change in environments. This discussion is based on the experi-
environment to trigger the presentation of multi-modal, ence related to developing an application that localizes
context-dependent information through a hand-held user position by interacting with infrared (IR) emitters,
guide. and adapts the presentation of information to the
current context of use. This solution can be easily ap-
Keywords Location-aware guide Æ Indoor intelligent plied in other context-dependent indoor applications.
ambient Æ Designcriteria Æ Handheldinteractivesystems We also provide users with audio feedback to help
them interact with the application. We focussed our
attention on the museum domain because it is charac-
terized by mobile users who need context-dependent
1 Introduction information, which should be provided without dis-
orienting them or interfering with their visit. This need
Thegrowingspreadofsmallbutpowerfuldevicesopens was also highlighted by an empirical study of the first
up new scenarios in which users can interact with such version of the Marble Museum PDA application,
devices in many environments in order to access the which did not include any automatic support for
information they need at different times and locations. location detection [2]: several visitors complained that
The context of use, which can change dynamically dur- sometimes they encountered problems understanding
ing usage, becomes very important during the design, where they were during the visit. The new, location-
and developers need to understand how to take it into aware system is currently available to all the museum
account during their work. visitors of the Marble Museum of Carrara. In this
Old paradigms in human–computer interaction, all paper, after a discussion of related work, we analyse
addressed by traditional GUI mechanisms, need to be technologies to support location-awareness in indoor
revisited [1] because of new elements such as the environments. Then, we introduce our case study and
present a solution to identify user location, describing
how we provide our users with information related to
the current context by using the visual and audio
C.Ciavarella(&)ÆF.Paterno`
channels. Lastly, we analyse the results of the evalua-
ISTI-CNR,ViaG.Moruzzi1,56100Pisa,Italy
tion test and summarise the lessons learnt from this
E-mail:c.ciavarella@isti.cnr.it
E-mail:f.paterno@isti.cnr.it work.83
userswerealsoprovidedwiththepossibilityofexploring
2 Related work
the map of the entire Center. The project authors in-
tended to support the visitors’ tasks by taking into ac-
Tobettersupportusersintheirdailyactivities, asystem
count their positions and what they are currently
has to provide users with information they need while
looking at: to detect this information, they assume that
takingintoaccountthecontextinwhichinteractionsare
the users are looking in the same direction they are
performed. This problem requires different solutions
walking. Therefore, when the user passes from one cell
depending on where the users are, i.e., in an outdoor or
to another, the system shows the map of the new cell
indoor environment. Whereas, in the former case, the
where the user is entering, oriented according to this
GPS technology helps the developer to find an outdoor
direction. This approach requires a large number of
user’sposition,inthelattercaseresearchershavetofind
beacons and a consequently costly system. Moreover,
different solutions to localize users. In our work we fo-
the application provides the users with textual infor-
cus on indoor environments. The museum domain has
mation. A better solution would be to use audio for the
been considered by a number of researchers (see for
project presentations. In our solution, we use MP3 files
example, [3–5]) because in such environments the users
to give users information about the artworks in the
walkfreelyinabuilding,withoutafixedpath,andneed
museum.Thissolutionwasappreciatedbyuserswho,as
informationrelatedtothecontext(i.e.,section)inwhich
we will describe in the section about our last test eval-
they are. Therefore, museums are an ideal test area for
uation,likedthepossibilityofobservingtheobjectofthe
researchers in human–computer interaction with mobile
presentationwhilehearinginformationaboutit.Also,in
devices.IntheGUIDEproject[4]visitorsinanoutdoor
our solution, we chose to install IR emitters on the en-
environment supported through several WLANs are
trance of each section. In this way, by installing only a
considered.Inourworkwefocusonindoorvisitors;this
small number of devices, we have implemented a low
requires consideration of different environments and
cost, easy to install system.
thus different solutions for supporting visitors.
Thetwoprojectsdiscussedsofaraddresstheproblem
In IrReal [6], the authors designed a building infor-
of locating the user through interactions with infrareds
mation and navigation system based on Palm Pilot
inagenericbuilding.Now,letusexamineaprojectthat
PDAs and a set of powerful IR emitters located
aims to detect user position specifically in a museum.
throughout a building. When the users are walking in
TheHippiesystem,developedintheHIPSproject[5],
the building, the IR sends them information related to
locates users via an IR system composed of beacons
their current position. The information is grouped in a
installed at the entrance of each section and emitters
cluster of ‘‘pages’’ connected to each other making an
installedontheartworks. This solution creates asort of
acyclic graph. These pages are broadcast using the IR
IRgridthroughwhichthesystemcandetecttheartworks
beacons. This solution has some problems; the first is
nearestanygivenuser.Hippieprovidestheuserswiththe
thattheinformationprovidedtotheusersconcernsonly
information related to the artwork nearest them,
nearby objects. This can be a problem in a large room
assumingthatvisitorsstopwalkingonlybecausetheyare
becauseeveniftheusersarenearanobject,theymaybe
near an artwork they find interesting. However, the
interested in a different object whose description is
design does not consider other potential reasons for
contained in another group of pages (i.e., located far
stopping, such as a crowd preventing movement. This
away). For each beacon, the pages are broadcast
project also addresses the problem of how to adapt the
repeatedly: no back button is provided. Another prob-
user interface to the user model. The model can be
lem concerns the cost of the solution: each beacon is
modified either directly by the user at the beginning of
connected to a PC in order to broadcast the pages.
thesessionorbythesystem,whichtakesintoaccountthe
Inoursolutionwewanttopreservethepossibilityfor
historyofuserinteractionsandthechoicesperformedby
theusertomoveeasilynotonlyinthebuilding,butalso
theuser;inbothcasesthesystemhighlightsproposalsfor
throughtheinformationinthesystem.Weprovidethem
further information to the user through a blinking light
withabackbuttonthatactslikethebackbuttoninWeb
bulb icon. The suggested information can be accessed
browsers:so,forexample, theycaneasilyaccessthelast
through links to the descriptions of the works that best
artwork they visited.
correspond to the current user model. When accepted,
Another approach has been proposed by the Cyber-
the suggestions are used to update the user model. The
guide project [7]. In this project, the authors provide
information is provided by taking into account the user
userswithcontext-awareinformationabouttheprojects
model and the presentations are modified accordingly.
performedattheGVUCenterinAtlanta,Georgia.They
The limitation of this approach is that often the user
installed TV remote controllers throughout the building
position alone is not enough to indicate interest in the
to detect users‘ locations and provide them with a map
closest work of art. Thus, the risk is that the system
that shows the area neighbouring the user, highlighting
erroneously identifies the user interests and determines
corridors and nearby objects, such as project demos. In
the corresponding user model. Consequently, the audio
this way they have divided the building into a series of
presentations can probably be of little interest to the
cells. The information on location (i.e., cell) and objects
user. In our approach in order to prevent such wrong
is provided in textual and graphical modalities. The84
deductions that can negatively influence the visit, we receive information about a patient when they arrive
havechosentoinsureusers’freedomofmovement.Once near the patient bed. In this project, the system detects
thesystem has detected theroom theuser isin,then the the location of the users (doctors and nurses) by trian-
user can freely activate audio comments regarding the gulating the signal strength from at least three 802.11
artworks of interest. access points. Its reasoning component wraps a back-
propagation neural network trained to map the signal
strength from each access point in the wireless network
3 Location identification to the user’s location. There exist other algorithms used
to localize users in indoor environment using WLAN
The identification of a user’s position in an indoor technology [9]. The major drawback of these techniques
environment can be performed at various levels of isthecalibrationstepthatisnecessary.Researchershave
granularity: for example, one is the identification of the reported location triangulation within approximately
exact user position. Thus, in a museum application, the 1–2 m, but this often requires significant acquisition of
systemcanidentifytheclosestworkofart;anotherlevel sample signal data to achieve, making it difficult to
is when the system is only able to identify the room realize in practice. In our case, the museum covers a
where the user is located. We have discussed that the large area structured in many environments obtained
assumptionthatthetimetheuserspendsnearaworkof throughwallsorpanelsmadewithvariousmaterials:the
art is proportional to the interest in it may be incorrect largeamountofdatarequiredbyvariousalgorithmsand
because there are many reasons for a user to stop the structure of the museum that complicates the iden-
somewhere(itcouldbebecauseofothervisitorsorsome tification of the access points location in such a way to
obstacles). This is one of the reasons for our choice of minimize the ambiguity in the signal-strength caption,
the second criterion. To explicitly localize the users in make the use of WLANs very difficult, as a technology
themuseum,wehaveconsideredthreetechnologiesthat tolocateusers’positions.Anothermotivationisthecost
allow mobile devices to offer some services: WLAN, of each access point because we would need a large
Bluetooth and IR. Table 1 summarises the comparison number of them in order to obtain precise results in all
among these technologies and the following sections the museum rooms.
explain the reasons for our choice.
3.2 Bluetooth
3.1 WLAN
Bluetooth technology is characterised by the interaction
We studied the possibility of adopting the WLAN between devices in a range of 10 m. Once the discovery
technologytolocalizetheusersduringtheirvisit.Inour step is finished (between 5 and 10 s), Bluetooth systems
system we only need to know when users enter a new can create a piconet (also called a private area network)
section. We would need to install an access point for composed of up to eight devices that have open con-
each room and position all of them in such a way that nections to each other. Once the piconet is established,
the coverage areas of three access points overlap at the the members randomly hop frequencies in unison so
entrance of each section. Then, on the basis of the they keep connected. We wanted to develop a system
intensity of the signal received the server could identify that supports users during their visits in the museum.
thelocationoftheuser.Anexampleofanapplicationof The interaction with the device has to be immediate
thisapproachhasbeendevelopedforahospital[8]. The because when the users enter in a new section, they
system synchronizes the information in the user’s PDA should immediately receive the information regarding
with the servers each time the device connects to an the section and the location of the artworks in order to
access point. For example, a doctor might leave on the prevent disorientation. Using Bluetooth technology, the
server messages that describe recommendations for visitors would have to stop at the entrance of each sec-
treatment to any nurse on the next shift or doctors can tion waiting for the completion of the discovery step of
Table1 Acomparisonofwirelesstechnologies
Areaofinteraction Throughput Timeofconnection
WLAN Rangeof100maround Theoretically11Mbpsbutin Immediately
theaccesspoint(inindoor practisecloserto4–5Mbps
environmentswithoutobstacles)
Bluetooth Rangeof10maroundanother Theoretically1Mbpsbutin Between5and10sto
Bluetoothdevice practisecloserto700Kbps discoverotherBluetoothdevices
Infrared Senderandreceivershouldhave Currently,accordingtothe Immediatelyaftertwodevicesarelinedup
thecorrespondingportstilted protocolusedbydevices,
ata30(cid:2)angleeachother,point upto4Mbps
andshotstyleapplication85
their device. We thought that this discovery step is not manipulate in their performance (both interface and
suitable for museum visitors and that it could be an domain objects).
obstacle for the full enjoyment of their visit. More
generally,theBluetoothtechnologyseemsmoresuitable
to support wireless communication among a set of 4.1 Context of use
statically located devices rather than mobile visitors.
Forthecontextofuse,weconsideredtheenvironmentin
which the interactive system should be used, the inter-
3.3 Infrared action platforms and the users of the interactive system
who wish to achieve their goals through it.
DeviceswithIRportscaneasilycommunicatewitheach In our case, the users can vary in terms of ability in
other using protocols based on the IrDA standard. The interacting with computing devices and knowledge of
IrDA protocols are characterized by an immediate the application domain. The structure of the museum
communication and identification, if the devices are forces to some extent the order of visit among the
lined-up in a 30(cid:2) angle and support a bit rate between rooms. Some large rooms are somehow structured in
2400 bps and 4 Mbps. The shortcoming of this tech- different environments using some light panels. The
nologyisthatthedevicesneedtobelinedupinorderto rooms contain many types of objects from the ancient
startthecommunication.Forexample,inoursystem,to Romans to pieces of quarrying technology of the past
allow the communication between IR beacons and the century. Thus, visitors need support to be able to
PDAs,attheentranceofanewsection,theusershaveto interactively select those items that are more interesting
take the devices in a vertical manner (as in a holding- for them and to receive related information. The appli-
and-looking-at-the-screen manner) because the IR bea- cationhasbeendevelopedonIpaqCompaqPDAs,with
cons are located on the ceiling. This usually does not Windows CE and an additional 1 Gb flash memory
createproblemsasusersoftenholdthePDAandlookto card. The availability of new larger add-on memory
the screen holding the device in such a manner and re- capabilityallowsustodevelopastand-alonesystemthat
ceive a recommendation to keep it this way as soon as does not need to download multimedia files, avoiding
they interact with the guide. the interferences with other devices and with physical
As mentioned before, we intended to provide the objects (such as a wall, an iron object etc.) typical of
visitors with the information regarding the section as wirelessdatacommunication.Wedecidedtousetext-to-
soonastheyenter.Havingconsideredtheprosandcons speech synthesis for supporting audio comments. In
of these three technologies, we chose to adopt the last addition, the synthesized Italian voice was considered
onebecauseoftheimmediatenessoftheconnectionand too unpleasant and was replaced with audio-recorded
therelativelylowcostsofthedeviceandtheinstallation. comments. The system was originally designed to pro-
Each IR beacon provides just an identifier of the new vide audio information with headphones but the man-
environment. This type of communication is sufficient agers of the museum noticed that visitors preferred to
because current PDAs can have one gigabyte of addi- usetheapplicationbysharingitinasmallgroup(twoor
tional memory. This is sufficient to keep local copies of three visitors) without headphones, considering accept-
audio,imagesandvideosonaspectstoprovidetousers. able the mix of the audio presentation from different
Inaddition,otherpossibilitiessuchasInternetaccessare guidesinthesamesectionasthiscanhappenrarelygive
not interesting for museum visitors whose main goal is the limited number of PDAs available. The mobile sys-
to appreciate the artworks that are in the exhibition. tem reacts to user interactions with sounds, context-
dependent information provided by text or audio
channel to better support the users in their activity.
4 Case study Currently, the application contains description of about
150 works of art, each of them with an associated Jpeg
We have designed, developed and delivered an applica- picture (the dimensions are about 140·140 pixels). The
tion for a museum, the Marble Museum located in audio files are in MP3 format. The application requires
Carrara [10], Italy. The managers of the museum deci- about 4 MB of memory. A new version of the applica-
dedtoprovidetheirvisitorswithinformationadditional tion, functionally equivalent but with a more modular
to that contained on traditional artwork labels. While internal architecture is under development and will re-
humanguidesareavailableforlargegroups,theycanbe quire about 400 KB. The multimedia data (videos,
tooexpensiveforsinglevisitorsorsmallgroups.Inthese images, vocal comments) require about 220 MB.
cases an interactive guide can be a better solution to
provide arich set ofinformation that can be adapted to
the visitors’ interest. In our approach, the design is 4.2 Tasks
driven by three main elements: the context of use that
includesboththedeviceusedfortheinteractionandthe In the design of the user interface we considered three
environmentwheresuchaninteractionoccurs,thetasks maintypesoftasksthatuserscanperforminthecontext
users wish to perform and the objects they need to considered:86
– Orientation withinthe museum.For this purpose three videinformationregardingmuseumsectionsgroupedby
levels of spatial information are provided: a museum the typology of artwork contained and supports a
map, a section map, and, for each physical environ- change of language whereas the lower part provides a
ment composing the section, a map with icons indi- command bar with menus to control the application: to
cating the main pieces of work available in the room close it, to activate the audio output, to go back to the
and their location. previous presentation and so on. When a section is se-
– Controlling the user interface. For example, this can lected,thecorrespondingmapisshownalongwithicons
allow a change in the audio comments’ volume, to located according to the position of the corresponding
stopandstartthecomments,andtomovethroughthe artwork, and the entrance and exit are highlighted with
various levels of detail of the museum information arrows indicating the expected visit order. Through an
available; iconselection,itispossibletoaccessinformationrelated
– Access museum information. This is provided at dif- tothecorrespondingartwork.Inthiscasethemainarea
ferent abstraction levels (museum, section, physical is used to show the title and an image of the artwork in
environment, single work). order to better identify it and the lower area is used to
closethepresentation,toactivateacorrespondingvideo,
and to go back. Figure 1 shows an example of a pre-
sentation at the museum, section and artwork level.
4.3 Domain concepts and user interface
Through an analysis of the behaviour of museum visi-
tors and the information provided by the human guides 5 Location-dependent interaction
we identified three levels of information that are inter-
esting for them: Inordertodeterminetheuserposition,wehaveinstalled
IRemittersattheentranceofeachroom.Wedecidedto
– The museum: the overall introduction and short
useIRbeaconsthatsendauniqueidentifierthroughthe
informationregardingitshistoryandpeculiaraspects.
IrDA protocol for each room. The IR beacons are lo-
– The section: information regarding the main features
cated on the ceiling of the building so that the presence
ofthesections,thecommonaspectsoftheartworksin
ofothervisitorsdoesnotinterferewiththedetectionofa
them and the motivations for their introductions.
givenuser’saccess.Whentheuserentersanewroomthe
Most relevant artworks are highlighted as well.
emitters send the identifier to the PDA, and the appli-
– Artworks: the description of the artworks and addi-
cation detects it and changes the presentation accord-
tional information regarding them are provided.
ingly. The angle covered by the IR beacons is 90(cid:2)
If we follow a Web metaphor we can say that for because each beacon is actually composed of multiple
each instance of a information level there is a page emitters. This angle is sufficient to assure a good com-
designed following specific criteria. In these pages munication with the PDA assuming that the user holds
there is information regarding not only the artworks the device in a vertical manner, even if it is not com-
but also supporting the orientation or the control of pletely lined up with the IR beacon. The IR beacons
the navigation within the application. have been purposely built for our application, even if
The information is presented through a common their structure is simple.
structurethatisfilledindifferentlyaccordingtothelevel The signal transmitted by the emitter is composed of
of information required. The main area is used to pro- eight characters. Initially we used only three characters;
Fig.1 AnexampleofPDA
presentations87
thus, the string sent by the emitters had the following
format ‘‘001@@@@@’’. However, after the first
experiments we realized that this solution needed to be
improvedbecauseIRwavescanbereflectedbysurfaces.
Consequently, the signal that reaches the IR port of the
PDA may be distorted. In this case, the signal may be
misinterpreted because a three-character string with
erroneous content is detected and the corresponding
identifier would be different from that actually associ-
ated to the room the user is entering.
Indeed, when the first version of the application was
tested, it happened often that the infrared signals were
distorted because of the rebounds; thus, the string
identifying theroom was either completelycorruptedor
provided a wrong information (i.e., the identification of
a room different for that of the room the user was
actually entering): to improve the recognition of the
Fig.2 The visual feedback when an entrance in a new room is
signal, a simple checksum of the character received detected
would not be sufficient (because it is possible to have
strings syntactically but not semantically correct). We
decided to extend the string transmitted by the emitters displaying in each section map the physical elements
byaddingthreecharactersthatareusedas‘‘paritybits’’. available, such as walls and doors, our system reduces
Each number is associated with an alphabetical char- the effort for the users to orient themselves in the sec-
acter: ‘‘0’’isassociatedwith‘‘A’’,‘‘1’’isassociatedwith tion.
‘‘B’’,etc.Thealgorithmissimple:eachtimeanewstring The page related to the section that the visitors are
is detected, the application checks that the part of the leaving, goes on the top of the history queue accessible
string composed of numerical characters corresponds to throughthebackbutton, togetherwith allthepagesthe
that composed of alphabetical characters. For example, users visited. Through this mechanism visitors can re-
a valid string is ‘‘001AAB@@’’. Thus, the application visit the already visited pages, for example, to compare
can correctly determine when it detects a correct signal artworks.
indicating the room where the user has entered. The
emitters have been developed by adopting stand-alone
technology: they are made in such a way as to transmit 5.2 Audio feedback
one eight-character signal per second. This solution was
easy to install and with a low cost. The use of audio in the interaction between human and
system plays an important role because the system can
indicate its internal state: error, alert and information
5.1 Visual feedback messages are generally displayed coupled with a sound
associated to each event. In this case, the sound is used
Whentheuserschangethesectiontheyarevisiting,they to call users’ attention to a system message. In our
want information about the artworks they are looking application, we decided to highlight the automatic
at. Therefore, the detection of the section where the detection of the room where users are entering, obtain-
users are is important to support them in their visit. In ing two results: the first reason is to signal this event to
our system, this information is detected automatically theusers who might notbe looking atthePDAdisplay;
through the interaction with IR beacons: upon entering thesecondreasonistoassurethevisitorsthatthesystem
a new section, the application provides users with a is aware that the context has changed and that the
museum map, where the section is highlighted. After information is related to the new section. For example,
that,anaudiopresentationofthemaincharacteristicsof in the Marble Museum there are sections, located in big
the section and a map indicating the location of the rooms, which are logically but not physically divided in
artworks in that section are provided to the users subsections. In this case, the system highlights the
(Fig. 2). In other words, we use location information enteringinnewsubsectionsactingthesamewayaswhen
only to provide the users with context-dependent infor- users enter in new physical sections (i.e., playing the
mation that helps to orient them in the museum. To sound and showing the map of the new subsection). In
avoid the problem caused by the failed misalignment doing so, we create a connection between sound and
between PDAs and IR beacons, at the start of the visit action that improves the orientation and the interaction
session our system presents information introducing the of the visitors with the system.
IR beacons in the museum and explaining how the vis- Thechoiceofthesoundtouseisimportant.Tosignal
itors can solve problems related to failure of the system theeventofenteringnewroom,wehavechosenthesame
to detect their entrance in a new section. Moreover, by soundgeneratedwhenthePDAisconnectedtoadesktop88
system.Therationaleforthechoiceliesinthefactthatan that identify it (walls, doors, supports for disabled
information link is established: when the application people). Each of these can be a sort of landmark
detectsanewuserposition,tosomeextentitshowsthat useful for orientation. In addition, all the maps dis-
there is a connection between the application and the playedbythesystemhavethesameorientationasthat
surroundingenvironment,justaswhenthePDAandthe of users entering in new sections.
application exchange information. As we discuss in – Minimize graphical interaction: in order to reduce the
thesectionontheusertests,theassociationofasoundto difficulties for the users to interact with the mobile
the section change helps them to get oriented in the devices using both hands while they are moving. For
museum.Toimprovethesupporttotheusersduringthe thispurpose,in our system,assoon astheuserenters
visits,wehavealsoaddedaudiofeedbackwhentheusers a new section the application immediately starts a
select artworks on the section map to assure users that vocal comment to present the new section.
the system has received their input. We adopted this – No redundancy in input commands: in desktop graph-
solution because we noticed that, after selecting an art- icalinterfacesusuallyitispossibletointeractthrough
work, users often reselected the artworks because they both lists of pull-down menus and icon toolbars.
wereunawarethatthesystemwasprocessingtherequest. Therefore, often the same command can be activated
Wewanttoavoidthiskindofdouble-clickingbecauseit either through an element of a pull-down menu or
can generate some confusion that can negatively influ- throughanicon.Inourcase,becausethedisplayhasa
ence the interaction of the users with the system. very limited resolution, commands can be activated
only through the icon toolbar.
6 Design criteria for the graphical part
7 Evaluation of the application
Designing an application for a PDA should take into
account the specific features of this type of device: it
In order to have feedback from real users a first test of
provides a broader range of interaction techniques than
the application has been performed. The evaluation in-
current mobile phones. The possibilities are similar to
volved visitors who were given a PDA with our appli-
those of desktop systems but there are two main differ-
cation installed. After their visit to the museum, they
ences: the limitation of the screen resolution and the
were asked to fill in an anonymous questionnaire.
possibility of using it on the go.
Thirty-fivemuseumvisitors agreedtofillitin attheend
We have followed these criteria during the design of
of the visit. The goal of the test was to understand to
the application:
what extent the application provides a valid support
– A Web metaphor: while not many users have had fromvariousviewpoints:thequantityandqualityofthe
much experience with PDAs, most have some expe- information provided, the modality of presentation, the
rience with Web browsers, which arecharacterised by interaction with IR devices, and the capacity to orient
pages that can be uploaded through links with the themselves in the museum. In particular, the question-
possibility of going backwards and forwards through naire was structured into various parts regarding:
the page history. We have designed our application
– Previousexperienceinmuseumvisits(fourquestions).
trying to implement similar features into our appli-
– Quality of the information provided regarding the
cation, but also taking into account its specific goals.
artworks in the museum (nine questions).
Thus,theresultingsystemiscomposedofanumberof
– Quality of the multimedia techniques used: audio,
graphical presentations that can be navigated by
images, and videos (seven questions).
icons. Each page is also associated with a voice
– Quality of the interactive part of the application: its
comment automatically started the first time it is ac-
use, the underlying concepts, the user interface (ten
cessed. Using the back button in the toolbar it is
questions).
possible to go back to the previous presentations in a
– Capability to support users’ orientation (ten ques-
way similar to that of Web browsers.
tions).
– Navigationfeedback:inWebbrowsers,linksthathave
– Some personal information, such as age, level of
been selected have a different colour from the others.
experience, etc.
This is a useful feedback for navigators. In our
application we adopted the same design: icons asso- Thetestwascomposedofvarioustypesofquestions:
ciated withartworksalreadyaccessedhaveadifferent someofthemrequiredonlypositiveornegativeanswers;
colour (red) from those associated with artworks yet othersrequiredanumericalscoring(onascalefrom1to
to be visited (grey). 7), and open questions aiming to stimulate critics and
– Orientation support in the surrounding environment: in suggestions were introduced as well.
order to help users to orient themselves we provide On average a visit took 73 min, 25 users were Ital-
various types of information: the map of the museum ians, 18 were women, and the average age of the visitor
highlighting the section where the user is, and then a was37.63%hadgraduatedfromauniversity,and29%
map of the section highlighting the physical elements hadahigh-schooldiploma.Only15ofthemhadalready89
used a PDA before the experiment. In terms of age, no average rating of 6.60 with an 0.63 SD) while novices
under 19 used it; however, the most numerous group asked for improvements (on average, 6.28 with a 1.23
was between 19 and 30 and the majority of the visitors SD).Similarratingswereprovidedfortheuserinterface;
was under 40 years old. experts users found the interface rich with possibilities
After collecting the data, we decided to analyse it and easy to use, while novice users provided similar
using two criteria: the first related to the users’ nation- ratings with a higher SD and provided suggestions such
alities and the second related to users’ experiences with as ‘‘the possibility of adding arrows to go forward and
PDAs. The application provides audio information in backward’’or‘‘improvethecorrespondencebetweenthe
either Italian or English both of which are obtained realobjectsintheroomandtheiconsintheapplication’’,
differently and we use the first criterion in analysing the thus showing that some problems can arise when users
data to verify if the different techniques for audio pre- interacting with the application have no previous expe-
sentation (a human voice for Italian visitors and a text- rience with PDAs.
to-speech engine for English visitors ) can lead to a Regarding the interaction with the infrared, the
different quality of the visit. The data show that foreign questionsaddressedissuessuchastheirutilitytosupport
visitors appreciated the quality of the information more orientation, and the ease with which users interact with
than Italians. In particular, the information regarding them and localize the section where they are. The data
the museum sections received better ratings (average gatheredshowthattherearedifferencesbetweenexperts
5.72 with 1.10 standard deviation (SD) for Italian and and novice users in this case. The former provided high
6.33 with SD 0.71 for foreign visitors). The open ques- ratings in a consistent manner, while the ratings pro-
tions provided indications of additional information vided by the novice users show that they found some
content that users would appreciate, such as more difficulties in orienting themselves and identifying the
information regarding quarrying in ancient times, current section. However, despite such difficulties they
including the quarrying methods used and the life of didnotprovideanyparticularsuggestions.Somevisitors
quarry men. The answers regarding the multimedia provided comments regarding the location of the art-
techniques show that the audio presentations were worksintherooms.Onesaid‘‘itwouldbeusefultohave
appreciated by both Italians and foreign visitors. Very maps that change the orientation according to the user
high ratings were assigned to the videos whose utility movements’’.
was highlighted by most visitors. Some problems were From the analysis of the data it is possible to
raised by the images; some visitors were dubious understand that the most appreciated part of the appli-
regarding their dimensions and clearness. cation is the quality of the information; for example,
Weindividuatedtwocategories:expert(someonewho foreign visitors particularly appreciated the videos
already had a similar experience) and novice (someone showingdynamicinformationrelatedtotheartworksin
who was using a PDA for the first time), and used the the museum. Novice users had some problems, both in
second criterion (related to the user’s experience in the the interaction and in the orientation, but in this case it
useofaPDA)toverifytheimpactofourdesigncriteria seemsthatthelackoffamiliaritywithPDAsystemswas
on the visitors. The questions regarding the interactions a major reason and the use of infrared added a further
with the electronic guide were aimed to understand its level of difficulty.
actual utility and evaluate its usability leaving to the
visitors the possibility of suggesting further improve-
ments. Analysing the utility of the electronic guide, we 8 Improving the user experience
noticedthatnovicesandexpertsprovidedsimilarratings
(on average novices assigned 6.47 with 0.62 SD whereas In order to improve the user experience new features
experts provided 6.40 with 0.74 SD). Regarding the havebeendesignedandimplemented. Ashighlightedby
easiness of use, the experts provided the best rates (an the test evaluation of the system, visitors asked for
Fig.3 Exampleofasection
map90
Fig.4 Examplesofpathfinder
activations
improvementsthat couldhelp them during thevisit. We Future work will be dedicated to the possibility of
haveprovidedtheuserswithorientedmapsanda‘‘path providing location-dependent support that takes into
finder’’ feature, which finds the location of an artwork account also the preferences of the current user and
they are interested in. perform a new evaluation study through an evaluation
The system defines the user position in terms of the tool based on the intelligent analysis of the logs of
section or subsection where the user currently is. It the user interactions and electronic questionnaires. In
provides the user with the section map oriented addition, we also plan to support visitors through a
according to the point of entry into the section. We variety of interactive devices (such as large screens) so
adopted this solution because we wanted the users to that the PDA can be used in combination with them,
orient themselves as soon as possible. The next figure and to consider RFID technology to provide additional
shows an example of a map oriented according to the location-related information.
user’s point of view.
Figure 3 displays: (a) the museum map; (b) the sec-
tionmapinthemuseummap(thissectioniscolouredin References
green) oriented to the entrance; (cid:1)) the section map
displayed from a different perspective. 1.Bellotti V, Back M, Edwards K, Grinter RE, Henderson A,
The path finder method implemented allows visitors LopesC(2002)Makingsenseofsensingsystems:fivequestions
to find the location of an artwork they are interested in for designers and researchers. In: Proceedings of CHI 2002,
ACMPress,Minneapolis,MN,pp415–422
bysuggestingthepathtoreachitstartingfromtheroom
2.CiavarellaC,Paterno` F(2002)Designofhandheldinteractive
they are in. The result of the request is a map high- support.In:ProceedingsofDSV-IS2002,Rostock,Germany,
lighting the section where the user currently is, the sec- June2002
tion where the artwork is located and the path that the 3.AokiPM,WoodruffA(2000)Improvingelectronicguidebook
interfaces using a task-oriented design approach. Designing
user is to follow to find the artwork. The next figure
interactivesystems,ACMPress,pp319–325
shows an example of the result of a user invoking this
4.Cheverst K, Davies N, Mitchell K, Friday A, Efstratiou C
feature and interacting with the system. (2000) Developing a context - aware electronic tourist guide:
The output of the path finder is a museum map, some issues and experiences. In: Proceedings of CHI 2000,
oriented to the new section’s entrance. The highlighted ACMPress,TheHague,TheNetherlands,pp17–24
5.Oppermann R, Specht M (2000) A context-sensitive nomadic
pathislocation-aware:whentheuserstartstofollowthe
exhibition guide. In: The proceedings ofsymposium on hand-
path, each change of section is tracked and the museum held and ubiquitous computing, LNCS 1927, Springer, Berlin
map will change according to the new context with the HeidelbergNewYork,pp127–142
current section being highlighted (see Fig. 4). 6.Butz A, Baus J, Kruger A (2000) Augmenting buildings with
infrared information. In: Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Augmented Reality (ISAR 2000), IEEE Com-
puterSocietyPress,NewYork
9 Conclusions 7.Abowd GD, Atkeson CG, Hong J, Long S, Kooper R, Pink-
ertonM(1997)Cyberguide:amobilecontext-awaretourguide.
Baltzer/ACMWirelessNetworks,vol3
After analysing the benefits and drawbacks of various
8.Munoz MA, Rodriguez M, Favela J, Martinez-Garcia AI,
technologies we have discussed our experience in devel- GonzalezVM(2003)Context-awaremobilecommunicationin
oping a museum application in this field. We report on hospitals.IEEEComput36:38–46
the results of the evaluation of such application. We 9.SmalagiA,SiewiorekDP,AnhaltJ,KoganD,WangY(2001)
Location sensing and privacy in a context aware computing
have also identified a number of design criteria that can
environment.PervasiveComput3:38-46
be adopted for other applications that share similar
10. The Marble Museum of Carrara Web site (2004) http://
requirements. giove.isti.cnr.it/Museo.html91
11. Bahland P, Padmanabhan VN (2000) RADAR: an inbuilding 13. Mori G, Paterno` F, Santoro C (2003) Tool support for
RF-baseduserlocationandtrackingsystem.In:Proceedingsof designing nomadic applications. In: Proceedings of ACM
IEEEInfocom2000,IEEEPress,Piscataway,NJ,pp775–784 IUI’03,Miami,FL,January2003,pp141–148
12. Davies AC (2002) An overview of bluetooth wireless technol-
ogyTM and some competing LAN standards, Invited plenary
lecture.In:Proceedingsofthe1stIEEEInternationalConfer-
enceonCircuitsandSystemsforCommunications,St.Peters-
berg,FL,June2002,pp206–211