Museum Accessibility Through Wi-Fi Indoor
Positioning
Antonio Bracco, Federico Grunwald, Agustin Navcevich, Germa´n Capdehourat and Federico Larroca
Facultad de Ingenier´ıa, Universidad de la Repu´blica
Montevideo, Uruguay
{antonio.bracco,federico.grunwald,agustin.navcevich,gcapde,flarroca}@fing.edu.uy
Abstract—Accessibility has long been a primary concern for by the end of 2017, the MNAV was contemplating replacing
major museums around the world. This is no exception for the this system with an alternative for a new exhibit to open on
Museo Nacional de Artes Visuales (MNAV, National Museum of
November 2018.
Visual Arts) in Uruguay. Having a special interest in achieving
With this in mind, the authors were contacted to design,
accessibility for visually impaired visitors, the MNAV sought to
implement a new system to allow these visitors a seamless tour deploy and evaluate this alternative, the result of which we
around a new exhibit. We present here the system we developed discuss in this article. In a nutshell, the solution is based
and the lessons we learned from its deployment and usage. In around Wi-Fi indoor positioning techniques coupled with an
particular, we used Wi-Fi indoor positioning techniques, so that
Android app. The main principle behind this idea is that
visually impaired visitors could hear relevant audios through
by using the user’s position, the app can forgo the use of
an Android app from their own smartphones based on their
location inside the museum. The system was further adapted interactions with the screen (e.g. through buttons). Moreover,
andusedtoassistthegeneralpublicduringtheirvisits,allowing being based on Wi-Fi, the system may be used by any
access to texts, audios and images according to their position. smartphone or similar device. Finally, the focus on Android
We furthermore share the complete source code and the dataset
was simply because more than 80% of Uruguayans have this
used to train the system.
OS on their phones.
Index Terms—localization, machine learning, open source
More in particular, the visitor can walk around the ground
I. INTRODUCTION floor of the museum and when nearby a specific artwork, the
corresponding descriptive audio will automatically play as an
Museums have always looked for new ways to engage
image of the artwork fills the screen of the phone. Although
theirvisitors,andinparticularaddressaccessibilityforpeople
marksonthefloorexisttoguidethevisitor’swalk,theperson
with disabilities such as visually impaired audiences. Going
isfreetovisitthemuseumastheyseefit,whichisparticularly
further than audio guides, diverse solutions have presented
importantforthosevisuallyimpairedbutnotcompletelyblind.
themselves as alternatives to making culture more available
The app was further complemented with a mode designed
andengaging.Theuseofindoorpositioningsystemshavebeen
for the general public. In this mode, those artworks closest to
at the forefront of developing these new systems, allowing
the user are displayed on the phone. By clicking in one of
a further interaction between user and their position through
these artworks, the user may read a descriptive text as well as
their smartphone. These new technologies have the potential
listen to a specific audio about the artwork.
to be game-changing in their approach to granting further
Our main contribution is sharing some valuable lessons
accessibility and a better experience for these visitors.
we learned from this deployment, in particular regarding the
InUruguay,theMNAV(MuseoNacionaldeArtesVisuales,
positioning system and its accuracy. As we further present in
National Museum of Visual Arts) has been specially com-
the following section, Wi-Fi indoor positioning systems are
mitted with accessibility. For instance, in 2015 it deployed a
implemented through Machine Learning (ML) algorithms that
systemcalled“MuseoAmigo”(FriendlyMuseum),consisting
learn to map the RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator)
inanumberoftotemsdistributedinfrontofcertainpaintings.
observed by the device from several APs (Access Points)
These totems had a 3D version of the painting for the user
to a particular area inside a building. This is the so-called
to touch as well as a place to put a tablet, provided by the
fingerprint-based scheme, first proposed in the seminal pa-
MNAV staff, which would play a specific audio regarding the
per by Bahl et al. [1]. Although several other papers have
painting.
been published studying this and other indoor positioning
Thus, visitors needed to use special tablets that had to be
systems [2]–[4], actual deployments are somewhat scarce.
asked from the museum’s staff (the system was based on
The present paper is an effort in this direction, and strives
near-field communication) and it also required explanations
at showing that the technology is perfectly apt for public
and assistance on how it was used. These factors were very
buildings and massive deployments.
detrimental to the efforts of making each user independent,
In what follows, we discuss what level of precision is nec-
making the solution ineffective at engaging visitors. Thus,
essary forthe system tobe useful, andwhat it meansin terms
ThisworkwaspartiallysupportedbyAntel. of number of APs and measurements used to train these ML
0202
guA
62
]YC.sc[
1v04311.8002:viXraalgorithms (the biggest costs of any new deployment). Some (SVM), decision trees, random forest, multi-layer perceptron
unforeseen problems (and their solution) are also discussed, (MLP),AdaBoostandk-nearestneighbors(KNN)[8].Further
in particular pertaining to 2.4 GHz-only devices. These are discussion and their evaluation are included in Sec. IV.
all important lessons that we did not find in the literature and Regarding the implementation of the system, the two most
we believe will be of interest to the rest of the community. prominent open-source alternatives we considered as starting
Moreover, all of the software and the complete dataset we points are Anyplace [9] and FIND3 [10]. They implement the
used to train and test the system are shared in our repository mostimportantblocksofanindoorpositioningsystem,which
https://github.com/ffedee7/posifi mnav. we discuss in the next section. Although they are both valid
options, we decided to work with FIND3 since we found its
II. RELATEDWORK
architecture simpler to modify and more flexible (and it has a
There have been many different approaches when it comes significantly larger userbase).
toachievinguniversalaccessibilityformuseums.Somearticles The question that remains is what precision we may obtain
suchas[5],[6]exploretheproblemfromthedisabledvisitors’ from this Wi-Fi positioning system and at what cost. For
perspective. We would like to highlight The Andy Warhol instance, how many APs are necessary to install or how many
Museum, which has developed the Out Loud app [7]. This is measurements should be taken in order to obtain a reasonable
aninclusiveaudioguide,whichconsidersdifferentdisabilities. precision are important factors to consider in any deployment
In the particular case of blind or low-vision visitors, the of such system, and which the available literature does not
app uses an indoor positioning system based on bluetooth discuss. Before presenting these issues in Sec. IV, we briefly
low-energy (BLE) beacons to play audios based on visitor’s present our implementation.
location.Particularlyinterestingisthefactthatitiscompletely
III. ACCESSIBILITYSOLUTIONDESIGN
free and the code is available at their repository.
However,theOutLoudapppresentssomeimportantdisad- A. On-site design
vantages. Firstly, it is developed for iOS, which restricts the Naturally, the more APs are present in the premises, the
possibleaudience.AswediscussedinSec.I,thepossibilityfor better the resulting system’s precision will be. In particular,
thevisitorstobringtheirowndevicewasarequirementbased the device should “see” as many APs as possible in all
on the museum’s previous experience. Moreover, as the name areas of interest. It is important to note that a signal level
suggests, these BLE beacons are simply bluetooth emitters just above visibility is enough; i.e. APs are not required to
with very low power. A phone with bluetooth enabled may provide connectivity, which typically required an RSSI above
then use this signal as an indication that it is near a certain -65/-70dBm, but a level above the sensitivity of the devices,
artwork. The most important disadvantage of this positioning typically -90dBm, is enough.
system is that several such beacons have to be bought and Inourparticularcase,practicallyspeakingtheinfrastructure
deployed(roughlyoneperartwork).Althoughthepriceofthis was non-existent, so the Wi-Fi network had to be designed
hardware is not very high, for museums on a tight budget the and installed from scratch. Since we wanted to evaluate how
best strategy would be to re-use their existing infrastructure: many APs were actually necessary, we took the conservative
Wi-Fi. decision to design the system such that in every point of the
Although Wi-Fi was not designed for positioning, the APs museum at least 5 APs were visible (more about this topic in
locationisfixedandtheyperiodicallybroadcastbeaconframes Sec. IV-C). If the infrastructure is already present, then a site
from which the AP may be identified (by means of its MAC surveyisnecessarytoverifythiscondition,andcheckifmore
address). Since the received power (or RSSI) of this beacons APs are necessary (and where).
depends on the receiver’s position, the measurements from Through a Wi-Fi network design tool, and after some
several APs may be used to estimate this position [2]–[4]. iterations with the museum’s authorities, the final disposition
Although trilateration seems at first as a valid approach to includes 15 APs. Figure 1 shows the museum’s map (two
this problem, indoor propagation may be extremely complex, floors, amounting to about 5000square meters in total) along
resultinginunpredictablerelationsbetweendistanceandRSSI. with the AP’s final positions (marked as red cirles). In this
An alternative is to divide the building into areas (such case, where APs are under our control, both frequency and
as rooms, or zones around artworks) and train an ML al- power were fixed so that the RSSI measured by the devices
gorithm to learn to map RSSI readings from available APs does not change due to dynamic configurations.
to the corresponding area; i.e. transform the problem into The next step is to choose what areas will be used for
a classification one. This is the fingerprinting approach to positioning. The final areas chosen in our case and their
Wi-Fi indoor positioning [1]. The deployment has thus two numberingarealsoshowninFig.1.Theyshouldbeassociated
stages. First an offline phase where RSSI measurements are with certain artworks, but not too small so as to compromise
obtained for all areas and the ML algorithm is trained. Then precision. Moreover, actual physical barriers between areas
an online one where the actual positioning takes place, and (e.g. walls) naturally help to distinguish among them. For
the RSSI measurements obtained by the user are fed to the instance,aswediscussinSec.IV-A,areasnumbered6,7and
trained algorithms. In our final system, we used an ensemble 8 were the most challenging ones, mostly due to the absence
of six machine learning algorithms: support vector machine of these physical separations. Each of these areas include onethe content. Regarding positioning, the app periodically sends
tothebackendtheRSSIofalltheAPsitsenses(onceasecond
bydefault).Theestimatedlocationisreturnedtotheuser,and
thefrontenddecideswhethertoupdatethecurrentareaornot.
In order to avoid constant changes between areas, we found
that a simple rule worked: if the estimated location is three
consecutive times the same (and different from the current
one), then the front end updates the current area.
Recall that the application had two modes, depending on
the user: general public and visually impaired. In the general
public mode it will show one image of each artwork in
this new location, and when the user clicks it, it shows
an extended screen with more information: text, image and
audio. The mode intended for the visually impaired visitors
requires almost no interactions. At first the app will play an
introductoryaudioandthenitwillautomaticallyplayaudiosas
the visitor walks among areas. The user can tour the museum
as desired and the audios will not reproduce more than one
time per session.
An additional and important tool was developed which we
highlight here. In order to upload text, images and audios of
the artworks to the system a dashboard was created, so the
museum staff could do changes by themselves. It is a very
simple dashboard where artworks may be created and it is
possibletouploadmediaaboutit.Eachartworkisassignedto
an area of the positioning system, although an artwork may
be mapped to more than one area. After creating an artwork
in the dashboard, it will be shown in the Android app when
a user is on the area that was assigned to it. Although it may
appear almost elementary, it was a key addition to the system
in terms of usability.
C. AWS Deployment Details
Fig.1. Thechosenlocationareasandtheirnumbering(thelowerfloorbelow).
Figure 2 shows the detailed implementation of the system
Notethatzone16isoutsidethebuilding.RedcirclescorrespondtoAPs.Only
areasopenthegeneralpublicareshown. in AWS. The three main use cases are depicted in the
flowchart. First, the device localization, which corresponds to
the standard situation where a user device sends the RSSI
of the artworks in the tour for the visually impaired visitors measurementsoftheAPsintheareaandthesystemestimates
(on the lower floor only) the device location. Then, we have the fingerprints collection
process, for which a particular Android app was developped
B. System’s architecture
in order to take the training RSSI measurements and upload
The proposed system architecture consists of two main them to the system. Finally, we have the training of the
parts:abackend,whichisresponsiblefortheindoorlocation, ML model, which is only done when new fingerprints are
and a front end, that interacts with the user. The back end collected. We next briefly describe each of the AWS system
is on the cloud (in our particular case at Amazon Web architecture components, and highlight the main differences
Services, AWS) although it may be hosted in any server, with the FIND3 vanilla system.
and is responsible for the training and execution of the ML Main Server: The main server is hosted on a docker con-
algorithmsandhoststhreedatabases:oneforthetrainingdata, tainer in a EC2 instance (Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud) of
another one for the multimedia files and a final one of the typeT2andmediumsize(2vCPUs,2.3GHz,IntelBroadwell
user’sestimatedpositions.Thelattermaybeusedforanalytics E5-2686v4, 4 GB RAM). The main server is in charge of
on the visitors’ habits (hours of visit, popular artworks, etc.). receivingallthebackendrequests,processthemandsendthem
Several important modifications to FIND3 where included in totheMLserverifnecessary.Ithasdirectcommunicationwith
the final version. See the following subsection for details. the database, the ML server and the ML storage.
The front end part of the system is an Android application. Important changes were introduced here with respect to
A lot of interdisciplinary work was needed to create the the original FIND3, in particular regarding the communica-
application,regardingaspectsrangingfromthecolorpaletteto tion with the database, which was originally implemented inMedia area where the device is located based on a set of RSSI
Storage values measured at the device. For this purpose, different
standard classification algorithms were used, which were then
Information Database combinedtobuildameta-learnerusingtheYoudenindex[12],
Server
as explained next.
ML
Storage First, data is divided into training, validation and test sets.
T2
The classic data partition of 70%, 20% and 10% respectively
Main
Server was chosen. After training, for each location y and each
ML
algorithm ω the Youden index J(ω,y), also known as the
Server
Device
T2 informedness statistic and which is equal to
Localization T2
J(ω,y)=sensitivity(ω,y)+specificity(ω,y)−1, (1)
Fingerprints
Collection ML Model is computed using the validation data, where
(Re)Training
True Positives
Sensitivity = , (2)
Fig.2. Backend’sarchitecture. True Positives+False Negatives
True Negatives
Specificity = . (3)
True Negatives+False Positives
SQLite [11]. As we intended the system to scale with several
GivenanewRSSImeasurementx,eachalgorithmprovides
users accessing the database simultaneously, we implemented
a probability P (y|x) for each location y. These probabilities
a separate entity, discussed below. ω
are then weighted with the Youden index J(ω,y) to obtain a
ML Server: The ML server is responsible for the training
total score Q (x) that is assigned to each location y:
and classification of the different algorithms, each time it is y
requested by the main server. It only receives requests from N
(cid:88)
the main server and also makes use of the ML storage. Q y(x)= J(ω,y)P ω(y|x). (4)
Information Server: A different EC2 was used for the ω=1
information server (type T2 micro, with 1 vCPU, 2.5 GHz, The location with the highest score is the output of the meta-
Intel Xeon Family, 1 GB RAM). It provides the artwork learner.
information(text,audioandimages)forthedifferentmuseum Asmentionedbefore,sixmachinelearningalgorithmswere
zones. In the database the different artworks are registered used: SVM, decision trees, random forest, MLP, AdaBoost
with their corresponding text description and the URLs to the and KNN. All of them are included in the scikit-learn python
images and audio files. This component is new with respect library [13] used in the FIND3-based system developed. This
to FIND3 and is accessed by the Android app. a subset from all the algorithms included in the original
Database: The RDS Database (Amazon Relational FIND3 implementation. We decided to discard some of them
Database Service) is an AWS service for relational databases, because they did not improve the performance and introduced
similar to EC2. In this case it is used for the implementation unnecessary additional computational costs. In any case, this
of the main database of the system. As we mentioned before, combination strategy proved very beneficial, as none of the
this is a new entity with respect to the original FIND3, and it algorithms alone obtained better results than the combination.
assumes the database functionalities that are included in the To measure the system’s performance, we used two metrics
Main Server in the original FIND3. For instance, it stores the computed with the remaining test set. Firstly, the accuracy of
labeled fingerprints, prediction results and information about the system, defined as the ratio of measurements that were
the different zones. correctly classified. Secondly, the confusion matrix, whose
ML Storage: It is an S3 bucket (Simple Storage Service) value in the position i,j represents the ratio of data points
which provides an API for fast, flexible and scalable storage corresponding to location i that were classified in location j.
for all the ML server data. The state of the algorithms of the Results shown here correspond to the average after executing
ML model is stored here, as well as a CSV file that contains the system predictions 10 times. On each execution the data
the data with which the model was trained. This is another is randomly splitted in the different sets (training, testing and
new element with respect to FIND3. validation).
Media Storage: Another S3 bucket to store all the media In the rest of this section, we present the different perfor-
content, such as images and audios for the different artworks. mance evaluations carried out. As we will see, each result is
This element was not present either in the original FIND3 associated with a lesson learned, which we believe will be
implementation. useful for future deployments and similar projects.
IV. LOCALIZATIONPERFORMANCEEVALUATION A. Lesson learned #1: the accuracy should be above 90%
Asdiscussedbefore,thepositioningproblemaddressedcan Duringthesystemsetup,around20,000RSSImeasurements
be considered as a classification one. With the RSSI-based (fingerprints) were collected in the museum, which was di-
approach, the goal is to estimate which is the most probable vided in the 16 different locations defined on the exhibitionFig.3. Confusionmatrixforthesystemtrainedwithdatafrombothfrequency Fig.4. Confusionmatrixforthesystemtrainedwithdatafromthe2.4GHz
bands. Values different from zero are highlighted (best viewed in a color bandonly.Valuesdifferentfromzeroarehighlighted(bestviewedinacolor
display) display)
map (cf. Fig. 1). The number of measurements per location the classifiers should be used for the location estimation.
was not uniformly distributed, ranging from 800 to 1500, as Each of the RSSI measurements included in the fingerprints
moremeasurementsweretakeninthemostdifficultareas(e.g. are associated with the corresponding MAC address of each
openspaceswithnotclearroomsseparations).Pleasenotethat AP radio. Then, it is possible to filter the data according to
inthiscaseeachRSSImeasurementhaslength30,aswehave the MAC addresses, in order to select only those radios that
15dual-bandAPsoperatinginbothfrequencybands(2.4GHz correspond to the 2.4GHz band.
and 5 GHz); i.e. we have 2 measurements per AP. Removing the MACs of the radios belonging to the 5GHz
The resulting overall accuracy was 96.0%, whereas Fig. 3 band, it was possible to train a new classifier and test the
shows the corresponding confusion matrix. It is worth noting correspondingperformancefora2.4GHz-onlycapabledevice.
that the values in the diagonal are almost all near 100%. In this case, the average accuracy for the validation set was
However, there are a couple of locations which have average 90.7%. In Figure 4 we can see the corresponding confusion
values below 90%, which were the two more problematic matrix, which again shows a good performance for most of
museum areas. If we look at locations 6, 7 and 8, we can thelocations,withthevastmajorityoftheclassificationslying
see some significant confusion in those areas. In practice, on the matrix diagonal. We can notice again some problems
those zones were close to each other, so it did not generate at locations 6, 7 and 8, where most of the confusions occur.
major problems concerning the user’s experience. However,
Concerning the system deployment, the proposed solution
the lesson learned from this test indicates that a minimum
was implemented by restructuring the framework code. As
accuracy of 90% should be ensured to have an appropriate
previously mentioned, for each location estimation the system
performance in the field.
decides if the device is 2.4GHz only based on the RSSI
measurements. If it has measurements for both frequency
B. Lesson learned #2: 2.4GHz-only devices should be treated
bands one classifier is used, and if it only has measurements
separately
for the 2.4GHz band the other one is applied. The additional
One of the first problems we faced when testing the system
computationalcosts anddelay fortheestimation isnegligible.
at the museum was related to the 2.4GHz-only capable smart-
Thiswayweobtainedagoodsolutiontotheproblem,achiev-
phones,forwhichtheperformancewasquitebad.Theproblem
ing a similar behavior in terms of performance for dual band
was that the system did not take into account the user’s
and 2.4GHz-only capable devices.
device. Although certain differences in RSSI measurements
among devices are expected, but are very difficult to consider
C. Lesson learned #3: each location should be covered by at
(except by constructing a rich training set), the total absence
least 3 APs
of 5GHz RSSI measurements is indicative of a 2.4GHz-only
device.Thiscausedthatthesystem,trainedwithmeasurements Next, we will analyze how the number of APs affects
collected with dual band devices, had a very bad performance the system’s performance. This study is of great importance
for devices that are only able to measure in the 2.4GHz band. in terms of cost, bearing in mind that the purchase and
To solve this issue, we decided to train and use another installation of the APs (if necessary) is perhaps the most
classifier for 2.4GHz-only capable devices. The system iden- expensive aspect for the system deployment. On the other
tifies if the device is dual band or not, just considering the hand, there is a clear relationship between the number of
RSSI measurements received, and then it decides which of APs and the accuracy of the system. So, we discuss now how)%(
ycaruccA
metsyS
egarevA
95.2
95.0
94.8
94.6
94.4
94.2
94.0
10 11 12 13 14 15
Number of APs
Fig. 5. Average system accuracy for the different number of APs. The
boxplotscorrespondtothetenperformanceevaluations.
many APs are actually needed to achieve a reasonable system
performance.
For this purpose, we follow the same system evaluation
procedure described above, but varying the number of APs.
TodiscardAPsweproceededwiththecriterionofeliminating
the most redundants in signal coverage first. This way, it is
possible to emulate the scenario where the installation was
initiallyplannedwithasmallernumberofAPs.Inpractice,the
data for each AP was removed by simply taking into account
the corresponding MAC address of its radios and filtering the
data from the RSSI fingerprints.
Figure 5 shows the average system accuracy for the dif-
ferent number of APs. For each case, we have ten different
performanceevaluationresults,sothequantiles25%and75%,
andtheminimumandmaximumvaluesarealsoindicated.For
the worst case analyzed we have an average system accuracy
of 94.5%, which corresponds to the case of a deployment
with 10 APs. Most importantly, analyzing the fingerprints, we
have verified that it corresponds to having coverage from at
least three different APs at each location. This amounts to six
measurements (since each AP is dual-band) per location, and
it is a very important rule-of-thumb for future deployments.
D. Lesson learned #4: the minimum number of fingerprints
collected for each location should be 500
Considering the deployment costs, the process of collecting
all the fingerprints at each location is another important issue
in terms of the working hours. For example, the application
we designed and used to collect fingerprints gathers a new
measurement every 2 seconds. This means roughly 12 hours
to collect the 20,000 fingerprints, without counting some
iterations that were necessary to reinforce certain zones. As
in the previous case of the number of APs, there is a clear
relationship between the number of fingerprints for each
locationandthecorrespondingsystemperformance[3].Thus,
in this section we analyze which is the minimum number of
fingerprintsneededtoreachareasonablesystemperformance.
)%(
ycaruccA
metsyS
egarevA
96
95
94
93
92
91
90
89
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Fingerprints sample size (%)
Fig.6. Averagesystemaccuracyforthedifferentnumberoffingerprints.The
boxplotscorrespondtothetenperformanceevaluations.
For this analysis, the average accuracy of the system was
calculated for different number of fingerprints. Starting from
the complete set of 20,000 fingerprints, random subsamples
were applied in order to obtain fingerprints sets of different
sizes, ranging from 30% to 100% of all the measurements. In
ordertoapplythesubsampling,thefollowingrulesweretaken
into account:
• The proportion of fingerprints for each location is the
same, and it is equal to the corresponding percentage
sampled from the total number of fingerprints. This way,
all the locations keep the same ratio of fingerprints that
they have in the complete fingerprints dataset.
• The selected fingerprints are chosen randomly for each
performance evaluation test.
• Due to the random nature affecting the choice of the
subsets of fingerprints, the accuracy computation is cal-
culated over 10 choices.
InFigure6wecanseethesystemaccuracyasthenumberof
fingerprints varies, which shows a clear tendency to decrease
as the number of fingerprints considered is lower. In the
same way as in the previous analysis for the number of APs,
we look for an appropriate minimum number of fingerprints
to ensure a good system performance. Considering that the
average accuracy should be above 90%, looking at the curve
it indicates that at least 40% of the fingerprints are required
(roughly7,000fingerprints),forthe16locationsdefinedatthe
museum. Recalling that the number of fingerprints measured
by location varied from 800 to 1,500, we can conclude that a
minimumof500fingerprintsperlocationshouldbeconsidered
as a general rule for similar deployments.
V. CONCLUSIONSANDFUTUREWORK
Asolutionwasdesignedandimplementedtoenablevisually
impaired visitors to have a better user experience on their
tour through an art museum, in this case the MNAV in
Uruguay.Thesystemandapplicationdeveloped,basedonWi-
Fi indoor positioning techniques, proved to be a successfulsolution [14], [15], achieving good performance to provide [2] P. Davidson and R. Pich, “A survey of selected indoor positioning
users an interactive experience on their visit to the museum methods for smartphones,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol.19,no.2,pp.1347–1370,Secondquarter2017.
exhibit. All the software developed and the complete dataset,
[3] F.Zafari,A.Gkelias,andK.K.Leung,“Asurveyofindoorlocalization
are publicly available in our repository https://github.com/ systems and technologies,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
ffedee7/posifi mnav. vol.21,no.3,pp.2568–2599,thirdquarter2019.
[4] C.BasriandA.ElKhadimi,“Surveyonindoorlocalizationsystemand
Although Wi-Fi based positioning has accumulated several
recentadvancesofwififingerprintingtechnique,”inICMCS2016,Sep.
years of research and an important literature is available (see 2016,pp.253–259.
for instance the very recent survey [3]), its usage is still not [5] E. Lisney, J. P. Bowen, K. Hearn, and M. Zedda, “Museums and
technology: Being inclusive helps accessibility for all,” Curator: The
very extended, with few institutions using solutions based
MuseumJournal,vol.56,no.3,pp.353–361,2013.
on them around the world. Our work’s main contribution is [6] B.Ginley,“Museums:Awholenewworldforvisuallyimpairedpeople,”
precisely in this direction: showing that these technologies DisabilityStudiesQuarterly,vol.33,no.3,2013.
[7] Out Loud App development team, “The warhol: Out loud app,” 2018.
already have the maturity necessary for massive deployments.
[Online].Available:https://github.com/CMP-Studio/TheWarholOutLoud
We evaluated a system based on the most popular open- [8] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, “The elements of statistical
source indoor positioning framework [10] and share with the learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, springer series in
statistics,”2009.
community important lessons we have learned in the process
[9] AnyPlace Development Team, “A free and open indoor navigation
that will prove useful for future deployments. service with superb accuracy!” 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
In particular, the localization performance evaluation and //anyplace.cs.ucy.ac.cy/
[10] FIND3 Development Team, “Framework for internal nav-
the user experience we have surveyed has shown that the
igation and discovery (find),” 2019. [Online]. Available:
averageaccuracyshouldbeabove90%toprovideasuccessful https://www.internalpositioning.com/doc/
user experience. In addition, the trade-off between the system [11] SQLite Consortium, “Sqlite,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sqlite.org/index.html
performance, the number of APs and the number of training
[12] W.J.Youden,“Indexforratingdiagnostictests,”Cancer,vol.3,no.1,
measurements were analyzed, being both factors strong influ- pp.32–35,1950.
ences in the deployment costs. The results show that ensuring [13] scikit-learn developement team, “scikit-learn: Machine Learning in
Python,”2019.[Online].Available:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
the coverage of 3 APs everywhere in the building, and taking
[14] Stephanie Galliazzi. Por primera vez un museo uruguayo tendra´ una
approximately500trainingmeasurementsperlocation,should app que funciona como audiogu´ıa para los visitantes. El Observador.
be enough to have a good performance in most cases. [Online]. Available: https://www.elobservador.com.uy/nota/por-
primera-vez-un-museo-uruguayo-tendra-una-app-que-funciona-como-
Analyzing possible extensions to the system, it is clear
audioguia-2018116163444
that the use of alternatives such as BLE could be useful, in [15] Ministerio de Disen˜o. La innovacio´n en experiencias muse´ısticas
particulartoimprovethespatialgranularityofthelocalization. de la mano de ingenier´ıa, tecnolog´ıa y arte. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.ministeriodediseo.com/actualidad/la-innovacion-en-
The indoor positioning based on Wi-Fi measurements has
experiencias-museisticas-de-la-mano-de-ingenieria-tecnologia-y-arte/
limited capabilities, only enabling to identify the room or a
broad area where the device is located. In this sense, BLE
beacons present advantages when a high density of beacons
is deployed. Combining BLE with the Wi-Fi based solution
willimprovetheperformanceovershortdistances.Thiswould
allow for example to display content when the user is exactly
in front of an artwork. In fact, our system may integrate
BLE measurements if present, and we are currently starting
to experiment with this technology as a complement to the
present deployment.
Anotherpossibilitywouldbetousesomeoftheseveralsen-
sors that are commonly integrated nowadays in most end user
devices. For example, the accelerometer and the gyroscope
couldalsobeusefultoimprovethelocalization.Theycanalso
be helpful to identify for example where the user is looking
at. For this purpose the camera could also be useful, also
allowing the artworks’ recognition with a suitable previously
trained algorithm. A problem with most of these sensors is
that they are typically not very accurate and there is a huge
variability among different devices, so the integration could
be quite challenging.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan, “Radar: an in-building rf-based user
locationandtrackingsystem,”inIEEEINFOCOM2000,vol.2,March
2000,pp.775–784vol.2.