2010INTERNATIONALCONFERENCEONINDOORPOSITIONINGANDINDOORNAVIGATION(IPIN),15-17SEPTEMBER2010,ZU¨RICH,SWITZERLAND
Indoor Navigation Approach Based on Approximate
Positions
Ory Chowaw-Liebman*, Uta Christoph*, Karl-Heinz Krempels** and Christoph Terwelp**
*RWTH Aachen, Informatik 4, Aachen, Germany.Email: {ory.chowaw-liebman,uta.christoph}@rwth-aachen.de
**RWTH Aachen, Informatik 5, Aachen, Germany. Email: {karl-heinz.krempels,christoph.terwelp}@rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—Until now navigation aids have primarily focused the system is the Map, described in Section IV, which also
on outdoor scenarios, whether driving on highways or, more specifieshowtheMapisgeneratedfromuserinput.SectionV
recently, walking through cities. These systems use the Global
summarizes the text generation method used by the prototype
Positioning System (GPS) for position information. Indoor nav-
to generate natural language instructions for routes. Finally,
igation however cannot rely on GPS data, as the signals do
not penetrate building structure. Thus other techniques were Section VI concludes this paper and shows some directions
developed to provide position information indoors, but most of for future work.
them lack the precision of GPS. In this article the approach
of an indoor navigation system based on imprecise position II. STATEOFTHEART
information is presented. To compensate the deficit of precision This section briefly reviews previous work on indoor posi-
the position information is combined with a movement model.
tioningandnaturallanguagegenerationasbasisforourindoor
Thismovementmodelisautomaticallygeneratedfromthemaps
navigation approach.
which are already required for navigation.
A. Fingerprinting
I. INTRODUCTION
Fingerprinting [Ohlbach et al., 2006] is an indoor position-
Tools for navigational assistance have become an essential
ing method based on wireless networks. The main goal of
elementintoday’stravelingsociety.Interactivesoftware,avail-
the Fingerprinting project is to provide precise position infor-
able for mobile phones, is capable of guiding users who are
mation. The approach is basically a pattern matching of the
driving cars, riding bicycles or walking. Until now such tools
received signal strengths (RSS) for all APs at a position. The
have focused on outdoor environments and are hence based
RSSattheuser’scurrentpositionarematchedtoadatabaseof
on the precise data of the Global Positioning System (GPS)
RSSmeasurementsatknownlocations,thefingerprints.When
to determine the current position of the device, and thus the
combinedwithusertrackinganda”noteleporting”policy,the
user. But indoor navigation bears several challenges.
achieved precision is reported to be approximately 1 meter.
First, GPS positioning information cannot be used for
However, the fingerprints are a static representation of a
indoor scenarios since GPS radio signals do not propagate
position, which do not adapt to dynamic fluctuations of the
into buildings.
RSS, which can be caused by e.g. moving people or changing
Second,withinbuildingsnavigationdoesnotrelyonstreets
weather. The database of fingerprints is also a prerequisite for
or footpaths but on traversable areas and certain connections
positioning,apotentiallylargedatasetwhichhastobefitinto
between such, e.g. corridors, rooms, staircases and elevators.
a mobile devices memory.
Thus such areas and also the altitude of the user, i.e. the floor
he is currently standing on, and possible connections to other B. Device Whispering
floors have to be considered.
The Device Whispering technique is also an indoor posi-
Third,thedescriptionofapathneedstobeintuitivelyunder-
tioning approach based on wireless network infrastructures.
standable for humans instead of precise distance instructions
The main idea is to reduce the number of access points (APs)
as they are used in cars or other devices with odometers.
considered for position estimation to those that are closest in
Thefirstissue,apositioningtechniqueforindoorscenarios,
range. This is achieved by controlling the transmitting power
wasaddressedamongothersin[Wallbaum and Spaniol, 2006]
of the WLAN interface: The device is set to minimum power
and in [Krempels and Krebs, 2008]. The third issue
before performing an active network scan. The closest AP is
on intuitive navigational instructions is considered
defined as the one answering to the request with the lowest
for outdoor environments in [Dale et al., 2003].
transmission power used, which is the minimum information
Section II gives a more detailed overview. Based
possible.
on this current state of the art a prototype indoor
APscanbetaggedwithgeopgraphicalpositioninformation,
navigation system was developed and implemented as
andifmultipleAPsareavailablethesetagscanbeusedtoap-
a software client for a mobile device with WLAN inter-
proximate the current position of the user more precisely than
face[Chowaw-Liebman et al., 2009],[Chowaw-Liebman, 2009],
just assigning the closest AP. Various caveats are discussed
which is described in Section III. Central data structure of
in [Patzak, 2009] [Krempels et al., 2009], but our approach
978-1-4244-5864-6/10$26.00(cid:13)c IEEE only assumes knowledge of the closest AP. The whisperingmethod is also robust against signal multi-path propagation
and power oscillations or automated adaption of transmitting
power in APs.
The method’s lack of precision makes it necessary to use a
novel naviation approach, as current solutions assume precise
information. This paper describes an approach specifically
designed for use with the Device Whispering technique.
C. CORAL
The CORAL system [Dale et al., 2003] is a natural lan-
guage instruction generator designed to enhance existing out- Fig.1. Componentsofthenavigationsystem.
door navigation tools, accepting route description in standard
formats. In addition, CORAL is dependent on a geographic
navigation information available to the client software. The
information system (GIS) for additional data about the geog-
dashed parts, representing the use of a local server are not
raphy traversed by the route. The GIS is required to provide
implemented by the prototype implementation. In a commer-
landmarks(liketrafficlights,churchesandothereasilyvisible
cial system this server would be responsible for providing
objects) with which the text decription is augmented.
information to visitors of the location, most important the
Coral achieves highly readable instructions (see cited refer-
Map,aswellaslocationspecificservicesandcontextsensitive
ence for an example), much of which is due to an exhaustive
information and commands (CSCI). See [Schilit et al., 1994]
statespacesearchtogeneratesentences.Suchcomputationally
for further information on these features.
intensive methods are likely to be too slow on mobile devices
In our decentralized approach every location is responsible
for a satisfactory user experience.
for providing the information locally, for instance by using
III. PROTOTYPENAVIGATIONSYSTEM the local WLAN infrastructure which can be assumed to be
available since it is used by the whispering technique for
Any navigation system must convey the route to the user,
localization. Thus, it is not required to establish a network
typically using a combination of graphical map (with high-
link to the user’s mobile provider to equip the mobile devices
lighted path) and textual instructions. Information about the
withup-to-dateMaps.Theprototypeimplementationhowever
local geometry is of course required to compute paths. In
provides the Map through a data file saved on the mobile
indoor scenarios it is especially important to ensure that
device.
generated routes do not pass through walls or go outside of
The Map is generated by a preprocessor, which provides
thebuilding.Thelattercaseoccursforinstancewhenignoring
a GUI to create and maintain the Map data structure. The
a corner.
”Admin”inFigure1isthepersonresponsibleformaintaining
A convenient way to provide route information to users
a location’s Map, by providing the data which is needed
are natural language instructions (NLI), which offer rich and
by the preprocessor. In the Map data structure locations are
flexible means of describing paths. Such descriptions can
geometrically described by polygons, inside which the APs
alsobefollowedwithoutpositioninginformation,forexample
and landmarks are positioned. Section IV describes how this
cars are equipped with odometers, thus instructions of the
input data is converted to a location representation based on
form “turn after 300 meters” are easier to follow than for a
hierarchical graphs. This conversion allows for an efficient
pedestrian. Further, NLI can describe paths inside a “sector”,
use of the location data which is of particular importance
which represents an area inside which positioning is possibly
for mobile clients. The Map is made available to the client
impossible due to the approximate nature of the whispering
softwarewhichisresponsibleforallinteractionsofthesystem
approach. This is described more precisely in Section IV.
with the actual end users.
NLI, when created by people, are heavily based on land-
The client software is supposed to run on mobile devices,
marks. Landmarks are distinctive features of the local geogra-
which do not have the computational power and memory
phy,e.g.churches,malls,fountainsandtrafficlightsoutdoors,
available to notebooks or desktop computers. Therefore, a
and specific shops, fountains and staircases indoors. To that
preprocessor was developed to perform the computationally
effect landmarks are also used by the CORAL system in its
intensive tasks beforehand. The client is left with the tasks
description of (outdoor) routes.
of computing routes in the provided Map, communicating
One important distinction of indoor scenarios are different
these routes to the user both graphically and verbally perform
floors in a building, which add a third dimension to the geog-
positioning.
raphyofalocation.Landmarkscanalsorepresentconnections
between floors, e.g. stairs and elevators, which cannot be
IV. MAP
displayed at all in a purely two dimensional map. This is the
approach taken by the Map data structure of our system. The Map data structure is the central element of the system
This prototype system is shown conceptually in Figure 1, it which encodes all known information about a location. The
is centered around the ”Map” data structure, which makes all two main goals of the data structure are adaptation to the im-precise position returned by the Device Whispering technique In any case, start and goal nodes on te skeleton level have
and support of the generation of NLI. to be found (from there the hierarchy can be traversed to the
Both landmarks and geometry, can be assigned descriptive coarser levels). The starting node is chosen to be the skeleton
”features”, which provide nouns to describe elements of the nodeclosesttotheusersposition.Todeterminethegoalnode,
location. The prototype implementation uses a small ontology the skeleton edge closest to the goal landmark is considered:
including words like ”corridor”, ”room”, ”elevator” and so on fromthetwonodesterminatingtheedge,theonefartheraway
forobjectsandspecificpartsoflocationstypicallyencountered from the user’s position is used to ensure the edge under
within (public) buildings. These features are used during text consideration is part of the route.
generation to assign nouns, verbs and in some languages arti- The prototype imlementeation selects the node with the
cles1, so that these landmarks and polygons can be described greater euclidean distance to the current position, ignoring
in the generated text describing a route. the geography. This worked well for the test Map, which
represented Terminal 1 of the Cologne/Bonn Airport. Another
A. Data structure
optionistojusttakeanyofthetwonodes,andaddtheedgeto
The Map is basically represented by a hierarchical graph, the route if the wrong node was selected. The latter approach
where nodes can contain a sub-graph. Our Map uses a hi- may be more stable for some geometries.
erarchy of four levels summarized in Table I. For indoor The Device Whispering technique defines a mapping
navigation, ”Building” is an intuitive title for the root node, from points in space to the closest AP. This prob-
which contains floors. The child nodes of the floors represent lem2 has been studied in various fields under various
thetraversablegeographyofthelocationinatwodimensional names. In computational geometry this kind of mapping
wayThe geometry is represented by “sectors” which also is known as Voronoi diagrams, where it plays an im-
take into account the local distribution of access points. The portant role in various applications [Aurenhammer, 1991],
sectorization process will be described below. [Aurenhammer and Klein, 2000]. Consequently, efficient al-
Finally, the lowest level of the hierarchy contains skeletons gorithms to compute Voronoi diagrams have been de-
of the sectors (which are polygons), used mostly to describe vised, the best known being Fortune’s algorithm described
traversal of concave sectors which occur at corners and inter- in [Fortune, 1986]. The voronoi diagram assignes a polygon
sections.Theseskeletonsformthebasicelementsofthepaths (calledtheVoronoiregion)toeveryAPsuchthatthemapping
for which text instructions are generated. describes at the paragraphs beginning can be solved by point-
Twonodesindifferentsub-graphscanbeconnectediftheir in-polygon queries.
parent nodes are connected. This relationship is also invariant These voronoi regions, computed from the APs positions,
in the other direction, i.e. if two nodes are connected, at least are clipped to the polygons used to describe the location. The
oneconnectionbetweenthesub-graphsexist.Thisensuresthat sectorization process is illustrated in Figure 2. The polygons
apathononelevelofthehierarchyalsoimpliesapaththrough resulting from the clipping stage are also called “sectors” and
the sub-graphs of the path’s nodes. are assigned to nodes on level two of the Map. Nodes are
This is an important property when the paths are to be connected if their associated sectors share an edge.
computed by refining paths along the lower levels of the Several algorithms to clip simple polygons exist, all are
hierarchy. This incremental approach to route finding can based on finding intersections between the polygons and then
reduce the time required to compute routes, as large parts of traversing the resulting contours, jumping between the two
thegraphneednotbeconsideredineachstep.Forexample,if polygons in such a fashion that the resulting shape is the
a route on hierarchy level 1 goes from floor 1 to floor 5 using desired combination of the two polygons. One such algorithm
anelevator,thereisnoneedtoconsideranyotherfloorsduring is described in [Weiler and Atherton, 1977].
route finding on level 2. The nice properties of this approach The second goal, the generation of NLI for a route, needs
come at the cost of complex book-keeping, which can be to address two requirements:
avoidedbycomputingthecompleterouteontheskeletonlevel
1) While traversing the route, a user passes by several
directly.
landmarks, namely those contained in the sectors which
are part of the route. The landmark’s order of traversal
1In English the word ”the” is used for nouns of all genders, in German
threearticles”der”,”die”and”das”arepossible.Whiletheimplementedtext depends on the direction in which the user is walking
generator isin English, theinterface requires anarticle assignmentfunction within the sector.
so that e.g. German output can be added by deriving a new class from the
2) Sectors can have complex shapes which are difficult to
generatorinterface.
describe with words. Specifically corners and intersec-
tions are difficult to extract from a polygon alone, and
0 Building difficultoperationsaretobeavoidedonmobiledevices.
1 Floors
TheMapshouldthereforebeabletodescribeaconcave
2 Sectorization(Rooms,Corridors)
3 MicroPaths(Skeletons) polygon’s shape.
TABLEI Both issues are addressed in the Map data structure by
LEVELSOFTHEMAP’SHIERARCHICALGRAPH
2Alsoknownasthepost-officeproblem.the inclusion of polygon skeletons on the lowest level of
the hierarchy. A polygon skeleton, an approximation of the
polygon’s medial axis, is a planar graph which has nodes
lyinginsidethepolygonand“closeby”thepolygon’scorners.
The edges of the skeleton, while creating a path between any
two nodes, also never leave the interior of the polygon3. The
algorithmtocomputetheskeletonsisoutlinedinthefollowing
Section IV-B.
B. Map Generation
The generation of the Map proceeds by issueing a node
and sub-graph for every “floor” level, which are connected
if landmarks inside the floor are flagged as connected. This
is done by the administrator when creating a Map with the
preprocessor.Thefloors’immediatechildnodesareassociated
with the polygons generated during sectorization. Two sector
level nodes are connected by an edge if their associated
polygons share an edge. The sectors polygons are created by
clippingthepolygonsdescribingthelocationsgeometrytothe
voronoi regions computed for the access points.
Thenodesonthesectorlevelarealsoassociatedwiththose
landmarks and APs which are located inside the associated
polygon. In the case of APs this is at most one AP, the one
contained inside the sector (a polygon), which is unique due
toconstruction.ButsectorswhichdonotcontainanyAPscan
also occur as can be seen in Figure 2.
Such “artifact” sectors are treated in the next step of the
algorithm by simply associating them with the access points
from those connected sectors which do contain an AP, based
onthefactthatwhisperingshouldclassifyallthoseAPsamong
the closest ones. This assignment strategy is used instead of
using all neighbors, which includes neighbors which were
assigned APs in this step, and avoids sets of APs dependent
on the order in which they are created.
Thenodesonthelowestlevel,representingtheskeleton,are
associated with single points, the position of the associated
skeleton node. The skeleton nodes are connected naturally
through the skeleton edges. In addition, the connections be-
tween the underlying nodes need to be passed to the higher
level. This is done by comparing all child nodes of one sector
with all child nodes of a neighboring sector. For every edge
shared by the associated polygons, the closest pair of these
skeleton nodes is chosen, on one condition: the line segment
connecting the two nodes must intersect the polygon edge
under consideration. This ensures that the skeleton edge stays
within the traversable area.
Note the triangle configuration of edges close to the center
of Figure 3, where a polygon without a skeleton node had to
beskipped.Thisisanuglycaseoccurringwhengeneratingthe
skeletons from the geometry. It can be avoided by generating
skeletons for the sectors instead of the geometry.
Fig. 2. A simple location, access points are the circled dots. The center Finally, landmark-based connections are created connecting
image shows the Voronoi regions generated from the access points. In the the floors on level one of the hierarchy. The plurals in the
bottompicture,theregionshavebeenclippedtothecorridors.Artifactregions
previous sentence are intentional: multiple sectors in a floor
generatedduringclippingcanbeseentopcenterbelowthecrosscorridor.
3Thisistrueforconvexandconcavepolygons.Fig. 3. Example sectorization and skeleton of a simple Map generated by Fig.4. Simplepolygonwithbisectorsandresultingskeleton.
thepreprocessor.Theskeletonincludesedgesacrosspolygons.
landmarksconnectingthosefloorswiththecreatededge.
can have connections to multiple sectors in another floor,
It remains to describe the algorithm which computes the
representedbydistinctlandmarks.Infact,evenasinglesector
polygonskeletons.Thisisanovelalgorithmwhichwasdevel-
cancontainbothastaircaseandanelevator.Tothisend,edges
opedduringthecourseofthiswork,andisoriginallydescribed
on level one of the hierarchy (between distinct floors) are
in [Chowaw-Liebman, 2009]. The algorithms underlying idea
assigned sets of landmarks.
isbasedontheobservationthatthemedialaxisofthepolygon
When assigning sets of landmarks to the edges, the edges
containsthelinesbisectingtheconvexcornersofthepolygon,
areassumedtobedirected(asavailableinpaths)todistinguish
and that a node exists where two of these lines meet.
betweenthelandmarksofthetwofloors.Thisisdoneinorder
The approximation of the medial axis computed by this
to accommodate the descriptions of routes which use these
skeletonizationalgorithmcomputesbisectorsforallverticesof
landmarks, navigating to the landmark on the floor where the
the polygon. These bisectors are then clipped to the polygon,
user currently is, and continuing at the landmark on the other
and intersections between these bisectors are computed to
floor where the path resumes.
createthenodesoftheskeleton.Everybisectorisassignedthe
The resulting generation of the Maps, leaving out some
closest point of intersection it caused (bisectors can intersect
details discussed above, follows these steps:
multiple others).
1) For each zone:
These nodes are connected by traversing the polygon con-
a) Compute sectorization according to Figure 2:
tour: the bisectors associate nodes of the contour with one
i) Generate Voronoi diagram of APs. skeletonnode(theclosestonekeptinaboveparagraph),which
ii) Clip Voronoi regions to geometry. Resulting are simply connected in order of traversal along the contour.
sectors inherit their features from the geometry Figure 4 shows a polygon, the bisectors of it’s contour nodes
they are generated from. and the resulting skeleton.
b) Find (and remember) shared polygon edges, con- The skeleton algorithm follows these steps:
nect the sectors. 1) Createa“contourlist”ofsegmentsbisectingtheinward
c) Associate every AP with the containing sector. angles of all vertices, originating at a node of the
d) Associatethosesectorswhowherenotassignedan polygon contour and ending at the earliest intersection
AP with those APs of all direct neighbors which with a polygon edge (length and polygon edges inter-
where assigned an AP in the previous step. sected are recorded). This restricts the segments to lie
e) Compute skeleton for every geometry polygon, completely inside the polygon, according to the Jordan
place resulting points in containing sector and Curve Theorem. This prevents intersections outside the
connect. polygonandensuresthecreationofpointsguaranteedto
f) Connect points from different geometry polygons lie inside the polygon. All bisectors are initially marked
if a shared polygon edge exists (remembered in as “intersects polygon”.
step1(b).Twocandidatepointsarelegaliftheline 2) Find the earliest intersection between all bisecting seg-
connecting the pair intersects the polygon edge. ments (again record length and other edge intersected).
See Figure 3. Theintersectionkepthasthelowestlengthforbothseg-
g) Place landmarks in the containing sectors. Land- mentscrossing.Allsuchedgesaremarkedas“intersects
marks connecting zones are remembered for con- segment”, yielding pairs of intersecting segments.
nection after all zones have been generated. 3) All segments still marked as “intersects polygon” are
2) For the landmarks remembered in step 1(g), create assignedanopposingnodebysplittingthepolygonedge
the according edges between floors, and associate all at the point where the segment intersects, inserting a”bisector” pointing opposite to the original vertex. This
”balancing” is required to assert the correctness of the
next step. Some care must be taken during insertion to
keep the contour in a consistent ordering, e.g. counter-
clockwise.
4) The ”contour list” is walked through. Every segment
creates a skeleton vertex, which is connected to the
previously generated vertex (which is initialized to the
last segments vertex). For segments intersecting another
segment, the vertex created is at the intersection point
determinedinstep2.Forpolygonintersectionsegments,
the vertex is created in the middle of the segment, and
by extension equidistant to the closest polygon edges.
Because the segments lie completely inside the polygon
the node is also inside.
V. TEXTGENERATION
Generation of natural language instructions is based on the
skeleton level of the hierarchy. The order of nodes in the
path defines a direction for the edges, and with the nodes’
positionseachedgedefinesalinesegment.Landmarksarenow
convenientlypassedbyintheorderoftheclosestpointonthe
line segment. Using parametric lines of the form~y =p~+x·d~
with origin p~ and direction d~, the closest points on the line
can be expressed as a scalar value.
The line segments are constructed such that p~ is the point
of the originating node and p~ + 1 · d~ is the point of the
terminating node. That is, the line segments is defined for
values of the parameter x inside the interval [0,1]. If the
closestpointonthelineisoutsidethisintervallitisnotonthe
line segment, and the landmark can be discarded. Sorting the
remaining landmarks based on the parameter for the closest
point arranges them in order of traversal.
These edges with landmarks in order of traversal form the
basic element for text generation: instructions consider one
edge after the other, with some connectives (e.g. “and” or
“then”)andlandmarksfororientation,whiletheskeletontakes
care of corners and intersections definition. Text generation is
based on three functions:
• traverseBy instructs the user to follow the complete
skeleton edge, which is described as passing by the
last landmark along the edge. This landmark is used to
reassure the user about being on the right track, so it is
left out if the last landmark is too close to the beginning
of the edge.
• traverseTo describes movement to a landmark some-
where along the edge. This is used for the last edge of
the path, along which the target landmark is located, a
distance which is communicated to the user in approxi-
mate terms, see below. The side on which the landmark
should be is also used in the description.
• rotateToward turns to face along the next edge. This
function is responsible for describing the action needed
at an intersection or corridor.
Fig.5. Twoscreenshotsoftheclientinaction.
Directions and distances are discretized into a few approx-
imate phrases like ”to your left”, ”ahead” or ”close by”, ”inthe middle” and ”at the far end” to give a few representative REFERENCES
examples. These discretizations provide relative information
[Aurenhammer,1991] Aurenhammer,F.(1991).Voronoidiagrams:Asurvey
which is expected to be of more use to people than precise of a fundamental geometric data structure. ACM Computing Surveys,
distances. The difference is that ”in 68 meters” can mean the 23:345–405.
[AurenhammerandKlein,2000] Aurenhammer, F. and Klein, R. (2000).
sameas”halfwaydownthecorridor”,thelatterbeingofbetter Voronoidiagrams. InHandbookofComputationalGeometry,pages201–
utility as long as users are not equipped with odometers. 290.ElsevierSciencePublishersB.V.North-Holland.
The prototype text generator simply uses traverseBy [Chowaw-Liebman,2009] Chowaw-Liebman, O. (2009). Context-Sensitive
Information Systems in Wireless Networks. Master’s thesis, RWTH
followed by rotateToward for every skeleton edge of the AachenUniversity.
path, except for the last which is handled by traverseTo. [Chowaw-Liebmanetal.,2009] Chowaw-Liebman, O., Krempels, K.-H.,
von Stu¨lpnagel, J., and Terwelp, C. (2009). Indoor navigation using
Thesefunctionsareimplementedbasedonthe”filltheblanks”
approximate positions. In [ObaidatandCaldeirinha,2009], pages 168–
approach, generating sentences of a fixed structure with the 171.
appropriate landmark, geometry type (e.g. corridor or room) [Daleetal.,2003] Dale, R., Geldorf, S., and Prost, J.-P. (2003). CORAL:
Using Natural Language Generation for Navigational Assistance. In
and direction placed in their positions. Figure 5 shows two
ConferencesinResearchandPracticeinInformationTechnology,Vol.16.
screen shots of the client software, showing a short and a [Fortune,1986] Fortune, S. (1986). A sweepline algorithm for voronoi
longer route and the natural language instructions generated diagrams. In SCG 1986: Proceedings of the second annual symposium
onComputationalgeometry,pages313–322.ACMPress.
for the routes.
[KrempelsandKrebs,2008] Krempels, K.-H. and Krebs, M. (2008). Im-
provingdirectory-lesswlanpositioningbydevicewhispering. InObaidat,
VI. CONCLUSIONS M.S.andCaldeirinha,R.F.S.,editors,WINSYS,pages225–229.INSTICC
Press.
A novel indoor navigation system adapted to the device
[Krempelsetal.,2009] Krempels,K.-H.,Patzak,S.,vonStu¨lpnagel,J.,and
whispering technique was presented. The central element of Terwelp,C.(2009).Evaluationofdirectory-lesswlanpositioningbydevice
thesystemistheMapdatastructure,whichwaspresentedand whispering. In[ObaidatandCaldeirinha,2009],pages139–144.
[ObaidatandCaldeirinha,2009] Obaidat, M. S. and Caldeirinha, R. F. S.,
it’sapplicabilitytonaturallanguageinstructiongenerationwas
editors (2009). WINSYS 2009 - Proceedings of the International Con-
shown, see Figure 5. Tests of the prototype system uncovered ferenceonWirelessInformationNetworksandSystems,Milan,Italy,July
that common WLAN interface cards (i.e. hardware devices) 7-10,2009,WINSYSispartofICETE-TheInternationalJointConference
one-BusinessandTelecommunications.INSTICCPress.
do not modulate transmission power when instructed to do
[Ohlbachetal.,2006] Ohlbach,H.,Rosner,M.,Lorenz,B.,andStoffel,E.-
so: all access points which are detected already respond to P.(2006). NLNavigationCommandsfromIndoorWLANFingerprinting
the lowest power request. Pending further inquiry, we are positiondata.
[Patzak,2009] Patzak, S. (2009). Aktive WLAN Positionierung. Master’s
currently assuming that transmission power modulation is not thesis,RWTHAachenUniversity.
implemented, possibly to reduce the chip’s area. [Schilitetal.,1994] Schilit,B.N.,Adams,N.,andWant,R.(1994).Context-
AwareComputingApplications.
The implemented text generation system produces NLI
[WallbaumandSpaniol,2006] Wallbaum,M.andSpaniol,O.(2006).Indoor
which are quite satisfactory, especially concerning its min- PositioningUsingWirelessLocalAreaNetworks. JohnVincentAtanasoff
imalistic simplicity. In both cases, output and generation ModernComputing,InternationalSymposiumon,0:17–26.
[WeilerandAtherton,1977] Weiler, K. and Atherton, P. (1977). Hidden
complexity,thesystemcomparesfavourablywithCORAL:the
surfaceremovalusingpolygonareasorting.
generated text is not quite as eloquent, but is generated with
muchlesseffort.Thisindicatesthatourapproachofskeletons
annotated with landmarks provides adequate information for
the NLI generator.
The very simple approach to text generation leaves open
many possibilities for extension, e.g. adding more rules to
improve both the natural language as well as for selecting
landmarks to use in the text.
AcknowledgementThisresearchwasfundedinpartbythe
DFG Cluster of Excellence on Ultra-high Speed Information
and Communication (UMIC), German Research Foundation
grant DFG EXC 89.