2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
Landmark-based Navigation in Complex Buildings
Paul Heiniz, Karl-Heinz Krempels, Christoph Terwelp and Stefan Wu¨ller
Informatik 5, RWTH Aachen University, D-52074 Aachen, Germany
Email: {heiniz, krempels, terwelp, wueller}@dbis.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—Growing numbers of mobile devices in our daily navigationconcept.Ournavigationsystemdoesnotdependon
lifeandtheircapabilitytofulfillchallengingcomputationaltasks a precise geographical positioning of the user in the building.
raise the question about new application fields beyond well-
Weincludetheuserintothenavigationtaskbylettinghersub-
established tasks. While outdoor navigation became a standard
consciouslycollectvisualimpressionsabouthersurroundings.
task for many mobile devices, indoor positioning and navigation
is still in the research and development stage. Even though She then actively informs the systemabout her position in the
complex buildings require aided guidance for visitors, today’s building by selecting certain areas from a list of preselected
mobilehardwareisnotabletodeliverareliableindoornavigation positions. A special data structure called building-graph rep-
system.
resents the complex building and all possible connections be-
In this paper we describe a novel information system for indoor
tween the areas. Using the physical constrains of the building
navigation in complex buildings. Users are guided through
the building by using images of the surroundings and textual and the human power of observation, we are able to design a
instructions. We avoid hardware-based user positioning due generallyapplicablenavigationsystem.However,eventhough
to its known drawbacks. Instead, users are involved into the this system does not require hardware positioning, we will
navigation process and complete missing information through
useexistinginfrastructuresinbuildingsforusersupport.They
recognized context and logical constrains of their surroundings.
will be included as a best-effort approach to estimate user’s
The human navigation process based on recognition of certain
unique locations and visual clues is the foundation of this work. position in the building-graph within a certain deviation area.
Theproposedsystemisuniversallyapplicablewithoutrestrictions This approach reduces the amount of choices users have to
on navigation devices or existing hardware in the building. consider.
Usability and precise instructions are further goals of our
I. INTRODUCTION
system. The navigation steps need to be self-explanatory and
Mobile devices of all kinds penetrate our daily life and the presented information has to be reduced to the required
change it significantly. The build-in hardware becomes more minimum. This way user’s cognitive load can be significantly
complex and consequently, the range of application steadily reduced and a more natural navigation experience is made
grows. possible. Additionally, by optimizing presented information,
Navigation is one of the many tasks that nowadays devices weprovideamoresuitablevisualizationforthesmalldisplays
master. The satellite-based Global Positioning System (GPS) of smartphones.
became the standard for outdoor positioning in recent time. This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces
There exist not only stand-alone navigation solutions but several navigation models and presents techniques for indoor
many of today’s sold mobile phones include the required positioning and navigation. In Section 3, we describe the
soft- and hardware for outdoor navigation. However, there are ideabehindournavigationapproach.Additionally,thissection
limitations in the field of application for such devices. Even coversthedatastructurewhichisthefoundationofthisnaviga-
though navigation tasks on street level are very precise, the tionapproachanddepictstheimplementationandarchitecture
GPS approach reaches its limit at the entrance of a building. of our system in more detail. In Section 4, we present the
Since nowadays architectonic styles are changing to more evaluation of our system. Finally, in Section 5, we summarize
individualandoftenmorecomplexstructures,itisindisputably this paper and future steps in the system development are
important to support visitors in such complex buildings as revealed.
airports,railwaystations,hospitals,andmuseums.Completely
new navigation routines are often required to navigate a
II. RELATEDWORK
person inside unfamiliar buildings. For this task exist several In this chapter we want to highlight relevant concepts
hardware-basedsolutionsaswellasapproachesworkingsolely and research work in the area of indoor navigation. Several
withlogicalconstraintsofthebuildingandhumanperception. space models as well as different positioning techniques and
This paper describes a new approach for indoor navigation navigation approaches are described and discussed.
in complex buildings. We especially aim for a generally
applicable solution, i.e., the resulting system should work
A. Navigation models
in any building independent from any compulsory hardware
infrastructureorothermandatoryrequirements.Avoidingstrict Navigation models describe different ways to represent an
requirementsfortechnicalinfrastructureinthebuildingaswell environment in a navigation system. Leonhard [17] differs
ashardwareconstrainsinthenavigationdevicerequiresanew between three navigation models. Geometric space models
978-1-4673-1954-6/12/$31.00(cid:13)c2012IEEE2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
base on precise positioning of the user in geographic coor- and rarely flawlessly usable outside of laboratory conditions.
dinates. These are either relative to a pre-defined point in the Build-in cameras in mobile devices can be used for com-
buildingortoearth’sglobalcoordinatesystem.Thus,aprecise puter vision to provide an alternative way of environment
localization of the user is mandatory. Today’s navigation recognition [10]. However, image recognition has a complex
devices work by using this space model. setupandthereforedoesnotsuitageneralapplicabilitywhich
Symbolic space models divide the surroundings into logically is aimed in our application. Another way of positioning is
closed areas. These areas differ either in their visual char- done via 2D-Codes [13], [11]. Such codes may include the
acteristics or in spatial separation. Single areas are logically coordinates of the location and after scanning one label the
combinedtoasinglegridstructure.Thus,usersareledthrough system consequently discovers user’s position. Camera data
the building either by their geographic coordinates or by their can also be used for augmented reality [11]. Here, users
logical position in the grid. observe their surroundings through the device’s video stream
Finally, hybrid space models form a combination of the first which is enhanced with additional data, e.g., POIs, directions,
two space models. Users navigate through a graph-based routes. However, this representation approach relies on very
structure but are allowed to switch into a more detailed precise positioning of the user and is often not applicable to
representationofthebuildingthatisbasedontheirgeographic indoor environments.
position. In retrospective, all those mentioned localization techniques
One further approach for environment representation are se- have the same short-comings in common. Most approaches
mantic space models [3], [5]. These models identify user’s require an additional hardware setup in the building or nav-
position based on her actual context. Such context may be: igation device or are known to be error-prone. Thus, these
user needs to keep an appointment at a certain time, she logs techniques are only reliable to a certain degree. There exists a
into a computer which location is known to the system or second group of approaches based on symbolic space models
she has daily repeating tasks. Positions withdrawn from this whichworkswithareasinbuildingsandthusdoesnotrelyon
information can then be used for localization purposes. precise positioning.
The following approaches base on the idea of supporting
B. Positioning techniques
positioning through the data structure. Thus, the system is
Nowadays, several techniques for indoor positioning sys- more independent from the existing technical infrastructure
tems are subject to research. Most of them differ in accu- in the building.
racy, signal coverage, installation and maintenance costs, and ThenavigationapproachpresentedbyChowaw-Liebmanetal.
hardware dependency. In this section we describe the most [4] provides an advanced data model for buildings. Users fol-
common research projects and address their strengths and low generated textual instructions and thus is guided through
weaknesses. thegraphstructureofthedatamodel.Thepositionoftheuser
Satellite-based Positioning System (GPS) is built into many is monitored via the device whispering approach [15] during
mobile devices nowadays and forms the most widely used the navigation.
outdoor localization system [9]. Even though GPS signals Barasetal.[1]presentedanapproachthatleadsusersthrough
are blocked by walls and thus GPS is not applicable on a building without any hardware-based positioning. Here, a
indoorlocalizationinthestandardsetup,repeatersystemslike model of the target building provides the route based on area
Pseudolites[16]areabletocarrythosesignalsintoindooren- identifiers such as room names or special locations. Objects
vironments. This allows users to use common mobile devices which base on these identifiers are logically connected. Users
without further hardware changes for navigation purposes. are following the sequence of locations and reach their des-
Tracking Wi-Fi signals is another approach that avoids ad- tination. However, the presented system provides very sparse
ditional hardware and thus is universally applicable to many information which lacks details. Furthermore, all information
buildings. This technique, known as Wi-Fi fingerprinting [4], is presented as text, therefore, users need to be familiar with
[15], is the main focus of today’s positioning research due the building to follow the route.
to its accuracy, low installation costs, and usage of existing Another approach working with the symbolic space model
infrastructure. was introduced by Jensen et al. [12]. The presented system
Additionally, further techniques based on light, sound, and encloses areas to logical objects which are connected in
radio signals complete this group. Approaches based on in- a building graph. Human movement is tracked by a tech-
frared, ultrasound, ultra-wideband, Bluetooth, RFID, and nique based on RFID signal recognition. Even though this
NFCallowaveryprecisepositioningoftheuser[9].However, positioning approach shares the drawbacks of all hardware-
all of those approaches require additional sender or receiver based positioning solutions, the graph on its own provides
nodes in the building as well as special navigation devices. strong constrains for possible actions within the building and
Another approach that works with existing sensors in mobile thus the introduced navigation approach is still reliable. A
devicesistheInertialNavigationSystem(INS).Thissystem proper building structure enables flawless navigation for this
usesthebuild-incompassandaccelerometerinmobilephones approach.
to calculate the walked route [18]. Even though this system is Landmark-based navigation for outdoor scenarios was exam-
independentfromadditionalhardware,itishighlyerror-prone ined by Beeharee et al. [2] as well as by Christian Kray [14].2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
Both approaches used depictions of areas as well as textual confirming her arrival at the target waypoint to be navigated
descriptionstoguideausertoherdestination.Thesesolutions to a successor located on the route.
were merely dependent on precise positioning. The overall
B. Navigation model
results were promising but they cannot be simply transferred
on indoor environments. Amongst others, special cases like In this section, we will focus on a data model called
missingtechnicalsupportforuserpositioning,multiplefloors, building-graph. In our system, on the one hand the building-
identicallylookinglocations,andtheclosenessoftheenviron- graph is used as a structure the navigation relies on. On the
ment need to be considered and require an extension of these other hand the system provides a module to construct such a
approaches. structure for an arbitrary building.
Apparently,itispossibletonavigateapersonthroughabuild- The graph consists of nodes and directed edges. The nodes
ing without precise hardware-based positioning. To develop representaspecificlogicalareainabuildingwhichcomprises
a universally applicable, cost-effective, and reliable indoor unique attributes, e.g., the entrance hall. They are used as
navigation system, we will focus on the presented findings navigation points and can obviously be applied as starting
and combine the techniques for improved results. points or endpoints. We distinguish between waypoints which
depict landmarks lying on the route and points of interest
III. LANDMARK-BASEDINDOORNAVIGATION which are relevant navigation endpoints and a subset of
waypoints. Both are discussed below.
This chapter describes the approach for our navigation sys-
The edges represent all possible routes between the nodes in
tem in detail. First, we explain the idea behind the navigation
the specific building. They have to be directed edges because
approach,followedbythenavigationdatamodelofoursystem
some routes can be restricted with respect to their direction
and the user interaction model.
of movement, e.g., an escalator. Every edge contains a rough
distancevaluebetweentheconnectednodessuchthattheuser
A. Navigation approach
can estimate how long she has to walk to reach the next
The concept of the developed navigation system follows waypoint and can easily compare sections. An estimation of
the human cognitive navigation process. Subconsciously, the the distance is sufficient since a person can hardly estimate
human brain constructs a unique cognitive map from the accurate distances in buildings [6]. During the construction
starting point to the endpoint of the route which is divided of a building-graph, we assign a geographic direction to each
into single route sections of manageable sizes characterized edge to compute the angle between two consecutive sections.
by waypoints and landmarks known or communicated to Independencyontheangulardegree,theusercanbeprecisely
the user [8]. A landmark is a unique recognizable reference navigatedbyadaptingthetextualinstructionsaccordingtothe
point in a section used for orientation and positioning of the computed value, e.g., turn left, turn right, turn around, follow
user, whereas a waypoint is a special kind of a landmark, the route. The direction patterns base on work by Chowaw-
namely the starting or endpoint of a route section. Hence, Liebman et al. [4].
the route consists of a sequence of waypoints which the user
C. User interaction
needs to pass in a predefined order. Each of these waypoints
is connected to one or several landmarks which make this Users interact with our navigation system in three different
exact position visually unique in the context of the routing. ways. In the first step, immediately after the system start,
During the human navigation process, a mental depiction of the user selects her starting point either from a automatically
the route, the cognitive map, is continuously compared to the suggested set of nearby locations or through manual selection
surroundings. from the set of all existing position. In the next step, she
This subconscious procedure is modeled in our navigation assigns her destination point from a predefined set. Based on
system. However, this approach does not only model the thisdata,thesystemleadsherthroughthebuilding.Itproposes
human navigation process but also human instructions in onedirectionandonelandmarkatatimeandtheuserconfirms
case of asking other people for the direction to a destination her arrival at the landmark in each single step. Additionally,
point. People tend to describe the route by providing two to she is able to check the right way by comparing passed
three landmarks which are located on the way and build the landmarks to proposed ones. User interaction is depicted in
directions using these unique areas. Our navigation system the sequence diagram (see Figure 1).
is based on the same principle. A route along waypoints is
computed after defining starting and endpoint. The naviga-
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
tion system displays successively the next waypoint the user This chapter covers the implementation of our navigation
has to pass until she reaches the endpoint. To facilitate the system. We introduce the architecture of the system and
navigation for each waypoint, textual instructions are attached describe the building graph and the user interface in detail.
which describe how to reach the waypoint from the current
A. System architecture
position.Additionallydisplayedlandmarksallowacontinuous
verification of the current position along the route. Themainfocusforthearchitectureofournavigationsystem
The user is actively integrated into the navigation process by lies on expandability and modularity. New modules should2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
User System
Positioning UI Navigation UI POI Selection UI User
Interface
selectInitialPosition()
presentSetOfDestinations
selectDestination() Locator Navigator
routing()
Navigation
Renderer Module
loop presentNextLocation Location
Router
Frameworks
confirmLocation()
Building Graph Network Building Graph
Fig. 1: User interaction Repository
Fig. 2: System architecture
be easily included into the system. The proposed navigation
system does not rely on hardware-based positioning. How-
ever, existing infrastructure in buildings is used for position and Wi-Fi fingerprints. The two latter attributes are necessary
estimation through so-called location frameworks. In the first because a landmark just as a waypoint can be suggested to
implementation GPS and Wi-Fi were used for this purpose. It identify the starting point in the navigation process.
is easily possible to include new frameworks such as NFC or A waypoint is similar to a landmark and is described by the
Bluetooth for advanced positioning of the user. same attributes. The difference is that a waypoint contains
Furthermore, this system will distribute data dynamically to a set of landmarks which are visible from this point and is
users. The required building graph is identified by the address not necessarily a discrete object. In fact, waypoints represent
object. After selecting a start- and an endpoint, we are able to the nodes of the building-graph, i.e., the starting points and
calculate the route through the graph and thus only download endpointsofeverysectionofaroutewhichhavetobereached
detailed information from the server for waypoints which tocontinuewiththenextsection,e.g.,branchesorstairstothe
are part of the route. This way we guarantee a reduced nextfloor.Apointofinterest(POI)isaspecialwaypointwhich
memory footprint which is beneficial for efficient mobile can be the target of an entire route. They additionally contain
communication. a textual description of the target. A waypoint is associated
The following Figure 2 depicts the architecture of our naviga- to the area it is located in and to other adjacent waypoints
tion system. In the first step our system requests building data by segment objects. Segments correspond to the edges of
foraspecifiedareafromacentralserver.Basedonthisdata,a the building-graph and have to fulfill the attributes discussed
routing module calculates the path from user’s position to her above. Especially, all landmarks positioned on a section are
chosen destination point. Existing location frameworks ease included into such a segment.
the selection of this route by approximating the position of LandmarksandPOIsarecollectedinlogicalcategories:Land-
the device. A rendering unit converts the calculated path into markCategory,POICategory,andPOISubcategory.Landmarks
textual directions, extracts all required images for landmarks, are categorized by included attributes, e.g., stairs, corridors,
and finally builds up the navigation module. pillars, lifts.
POICategory and POISubcategory are used to facilitate the
B. Building Graph
manual choices of the endpoint.
A building graph is identified by the address of the respec- To support the user by determining her starting point, GPS-
tivebuilding.Thisway,weareabletopreciselydownloadonly coordinates and Wi-Fi fingerprints are assigned to landmarks
required data chunks and thus lower our memory footstep. and waypoints. With the appropriate infrastructure, the navi-
A building is subdivided in different areas, e.g., different gation system can suggest possible starting points based on
floors, departments which distinguish in a logical matter. An hardware positioning. A GPS object contains a latitude, a
area can be a subarea of another one, e.g., there can be longitude,andanaccuracyvalueandreferstoeverylandmark
several departments on the same floor of a building. Partially and waypoint with the same coordinates. The accuracy value
intersecting areas are not considered in our implementation. specifies the accuracy during the measurement to determine
Another important entity is a landmark. A landmark is a the coordinates of a point in a building conditioned by
unique recognizable reference point used for orientation and shielding. The system suggests only estimated points whose
positioning.Itcontainspicturesofthereferencepointfromthe coordinates stay within this value.
user’s point of view, an identifying name, GPS-coordinates, Wi-Fi fingerprinting uses the signals of Wi-Fi access points2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
for positioning. To determine the user position, the mea- and allows much faster positioning. Calculation of the initial
sured fingerprint of the navigation system is compared to node is done analog to the automatic suggestions component.
the fingerprint objects in the database. Hence, every Wi-Fi 2) Destination selection: Additionally to a reliable initial
fingerprint object requires the creation date, the access point positioning it is important to clearly select a waypoint in the
identifier(SSID),thesignalstrength,andthereferencestothe building graph as a destination point. This happens analog to
considered landmarks and waypoints. the approach described in the previous section. First, the user
selects one matching POI-Category from the list, e.g., rooms,
C. Navigation module
restaurants, shops. A second list is displayed containing all
The navigation module transforms the route description POI-Subcategorieswhichwereincludedintothiscategory.The
from the building graph into an appropriate visual representa- selectedPOI-Subcategoryiseitherconnectedtoasingle,well-
tion with respect to the defined user interaction protocols. It defined POI in the graph or to a general term, e.g., restroom,
is crucial to provide a self-explanatory, intuitive interface that ATM, phone booth. The user is then led to the nearest POI
supports users through the task of navigation. Furthermore, which corresponds to that subcategory.
this component is responsible for locating user’s initial posi- 3) User navigation: After a proper selection of a starting
tion in the building graph, calculating the best path through point and an endpoint, our system calculates a route through
thebuildingandrenderingtextualinstructionsaccordingtothe thebuildingusingDijkstra’sshortestpathalgorithm[7].Inour
steps on the route. Following sections will depict these tasks working environment with several hundred navigation points
in more details. in the building graph, this algorithm is able to calculate any
1) Initial user positioning: For a proper navigation it is route within a reasonable time of few hundreds of millisec-
crucial to identify user’s initial position accurately. Even onds.
though several technical solutions were presented in Chapter Based on this routing, we render all relevant information
II, it was shown that none of those approaches suit our for navigation. The navigation view contains two important
solution well enough. Existing drawbacks, e.g., dependency elements: textual instructions which are built after calculating
on additional hardware or error-proneness, hinder a reliable all route segments and graphical representations of relevant
user positioning based solely on one single solution. Thus, landmarks on the way to the endpoint.
hardware-based approaches will only be used to support our Textual instructions are important to guide users from one
main positioning technique: observations made by the user. navigation point to the following. Such instructions include
The proposed approach relies on visual perception of unique the approximate length of current route segment, walking
featuresinthesurroundingareaandarobustmappingofthose directions, and the name of the endpoint. Walking directions
spots on the building graph. are derived from angles between prior and current segments
We implemented two ways of informing the system about of the route. These values are converted into human readable
the position of the user. The first method to identify user’s instructions, such as ”Turn slightly left and follow the route
location requires hardware-based positioning. The first imple- for 20 meters”. Waypoints on different floors are displayed
mented software version tracks Wi-Fi signals to build up a accordingly, e.g., ”Go one story up to the 1st floor”.
rough estimation of user’s position. We assume that Wi-Fi Additionally to the values for direction and route length,
tracking delivers an approximate position within a predefined landmarks which can be perceived on the route and the
deviation area. This deviation area depends hardly on the waypoints from the beginning and the end of the route are
environment, i.e., number of Wi-Fi access points, architecture fetched from the database. These objects provide visual clues
of the building, quality of navigation device. In our test for the user. She is then able to adjust her position to her
environment,aconsidereddeviationof15metersprovedtobe cognitive map of the building and make sure that she follows
aconvenientvalue.Ouralgorithmselectsalllandmarkswithin the correct route.
thedeviationareaandpresentsimagesoftheselectedareasto
D. User interface
the user (see Figure 3(a)). Then she compares shown images
to her present observations and selects her current scene. The Three different views build up the main user interaction
selected landmark is then tracked back over the associated stack for our navigation system. The first view (see Figure
segmentelementtothelinkedwaypointwhichmarkstheinitial 3(a)) depicts landmarks in the surroundings which are auto-
node in the navigation route. matically selected by the system as possible user positions. In
In case of malfunctioning or non-existing hardware-based case of missing sensor-based positioning infrastructure in the
positioning, users may switch to the manual selection from building,theuserisabletoselectlandmarkcharacteristicsand
a set of all landmarks. We implemented a filtering option her position from a list (see Figure 3(b)).
basedonlandmarkcategoriestoeasetheselectionoftheinitial The following destination selection view displays the POI-
area.Suchcategoriesarestairs,shops,entrypoints,entrances, CategoriesandPOI-Subcategoriesintwotexttables.ThePOI-
corridors,andotheruniquefeatures.Userschooseenvironment Subcategorytable containsentries basedonthe previouslyse-
characteristics from a set of categories and consequently filter lectedPOI-Category.Thus,thepresentedchoicesaredisplayed
the set of displayed landmarks. Therefore, selection of two to in an easily understandable manner.
three categories reduces the displayed landmarks significantly In the final view, all necessary components for navigation are2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
Position Suggestions Categories Landmarks Waypoint Carousel
Category 1 Fig u r e 1 Landmark 1 Textual Instructions
Category 2
Category 3 Fig u r e 2 Landmark 2
Category 4
Waypoint Figure
Fig u r e 3 Landmark 3 Waypoint Figure
Category 5
Category 6 Fig u r e 4 Landmark 4
Category 7
Category 8 Fig u r e 5 Landmark 5
Landmark Carousel
Category 9
Fig u r e 6 Landmark 6
Category 10 Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4
Manual Selection
(a) Automaticpositionsuggestions (b) Manualpositionselection (c) Usernavigation
Fig. 3: Sketches for user interfaces
combinedandformtheusernavigationview(seeFigure3(c)). many university departments are located in the main building,
This main element on the screen is the waypoint-carousel. It most students are not acquainted with this building, thus, it
includesthegeneratedtextualinstructionsaswellasadditional can be assumed that the test results are not distorted.
descriptions of the surroundings and the picture of the final Two test routes of the same length and complexity were
waypoint for the active route segment. This module always selected for the test. Each of both routes lead from the front
depicts one single segment of the route. Once user’s view entrance to two target rooms and back again. The first route
matches the depicted landmark, she may go on to the next leads the participant from the main entrance to a lecture hall
segment by pressing a button. on the first floor in the left wing of the building. This room
Underneath the waypoint-carousel follows the landmark- is not signposted and the entrance is hidden behind a pillar.
carousel. It contains all landmarks which lie on the segment. Afterwards,shehastoattainaroomonthesparselyfrequented
Their purpose is to provide users with additional information third floor and return to the starting point. The second route
abouttheroute.Wheneversheobservesoneofthelandmarks, leads the testee to the right wing of the building. On her
shecanbecertaintofollowtherightpath.Thefinalrealization way, she has to find a room on an intermediate story between
of the user interfaces is illustrated in Figure 4(b) and 4(a). the first and the second floor. By using the implemented
standard version of the navigation software, it is yet not
V. EVALUATION
possible to locate a point on an intermediate story. Therefore,
Inthissectionwediscusstheevaluationoftheimplemented additional textual descriptions are added to such POIs. Next,
navigation system. Every participant has to pass two test the participant is instructed to visit the university’s post office
routes within a building. On one test route she uses the locatedinthebasementofthebuilding.Finally,shereturnsto
implemented software, on the other one she searches her the main entrance.
endpoint with one of the two alternative navigation methods: The test group consisted of 3 female and 11 male students
verbal assignments by the receptionist or the floor plan of the aged between 19 and 30. They had to pass one route with the
building. Afterwards, the different approaches are compared navigation system and the other with one of two alternatives.
based on time measurements and user feedback. Six of them used the oral instructions from the receptionist,
the other eight participants used a very detailed building map.
A. Test procedure and setup description
Required time, chosen routes, deviations in usability of the
The depicted navigation system was implemented in navigation system, and comments of the participants were
Objective-C on the Cocoa-Framework. During the test pro- writtendownduringthestudy.Themainpartoftheevaluation
cedure the software ran on an Apple iPad 2 Wi-Fi with iOS bases on an online questionnaire. Users could evaluate the
5.0.1. application and the alternatives, write comments, and rate the
The main building of RWTH Aachen was chosen to conduct usability of the system.
the user tests. This building has a complex architecture. It
is rambling and consists of three upper floors, two basement
floors, different kinds of stairways, and elevators. Although2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
(a) Manualpositionselection (b) Usernavigationview
Fig. 4: Application components
B. Outcomes not well-understood by the users. Presumably, directions by
random passengers would be more questionable and vague.
The first part of the evaluation comprises the time compar- Our indoor navigation system performed better in case of the
ison between the navigation approaches. It was considered to route becoming complex. In this situation, the environment
useroutesofthesamelengthanddifficultyinregardstoindoor often did not match the cognitive map of the user and
navigation. Differences between the navigation approaches consequently confused her. Otherwise, if the navigation route
could be determined by comparing single sections of both is well-structured and can be easily visualized in a cognitive
routes. The essential differences could be highlighted by map,analogalternativesallowtheusertoreachherdestination
comparing the two routes using the mentioned navigation morequicklysincemostofthenavigationtasksarecompleted
methods. Overall, the navigation system performed equally on the fly in the human mind.
well or better than the two alternatives (see Figure 5). The In the following, we describe the evaluation results of the
two alternatives to our system revealed clear short-coming implemented navigation system. The participants interacted
during the navigation process. The use of maps revealed with the system as expected and successfully recognized the
weaknesses in complex parts of the building, e.g., finding startingpoint,endpoint,andthelandmarks.Importantfindings
the room on the intermediate story. This implies that users were made during the user study. Stopping in the middle
can hardly comprehend challenging parts of a building by of a corridor only by using landmarks did not work for the
using a common floor plan. Increased complexity of the route most participants. Since we are working with approximated,
consequently increased the time for the guidance by the map. imprecise locations, additional textual instructions are abso-
The verbal explanation has been partially fragmented which lutely necessary to deal with that problem. Furthermore, we
led to longer navigation. Participants had often to increase foundoutthatglassdoorsrequiretohaveaseparatelandmark.
their searching space and thus only found the POI by a All users expected a new instruction when they arrived at
coincidence. Even though the receptionists were trained for such glass doors and were confused not finding the picture
advising visitors in the building, their instructions were often of the displayed landmark on their iPad, even if it was clearly2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
03:36
02:24
01:12
00:00
)nim(
emit
09:36
07:12
04:48
02:24
00:00
1 2 3
Median of single route sections (Route A)
)nim(
emit
1 2 3
Median of accumulated time (Route A)
06:00
04:48
03:36
02:24
01:12
00:00
)nim(
emit
14:24
12:00
09:36
07:12
04:48
02:24
00:00
1 2 3
Median of single route sections (Route B)
)nim(
emit
1 2 3
Median of accumulated time (Route B)
App Map Oral instructions
Fig. 5: Time measurements for two routes with three segments
visible behind the door. As mentioned before, it is crucial movement during the navigation process.
that landmarks are depicted from the user’s point of view. Finally, 57% of the testees would prefer navigation with the
Slightshiftedvisionangleofthedepictedviewconfusesmost applied software over the compared alternatives. Participants
participants and the user tends to turn in the same direction. named uncertainty in dealing with the software for being
Consequently, textual instructions do not work in this case. the main reason to prefer analog navigation approaches. On
A crucial problem occurred when parts of the building look that point, it should be considered that the software is in
identically. For participants, it was not possible to distinguish an experimental stage and many extensions are in progress.
similar waypoints and landmarks. By consulting the textual We assume that later iteration stages of the implementation
instructions they tried to deduce the right floor. In such cases, and familiarization with the software would increase the
thetextualinstructionsabsolutelyconductthenavigation.Itis acceptance rate.
then very important to provide unique cues for the context of
the user. VI. CONCLUSION&FUTUREWORK
The usage of the additional landmarks which lie between to
Buildings represent an insuperable barrier for existing nav-
waypoints appeared as redundant. Almost nobody considered
igation systems. Although there exist approaches for indoor
thisadditionalinformation,eveninsituationswhensuchclues
navigation, they suffer from various disadvantages. A new
were helpful and the participants were confused and disori-
approach for navigation in complex buildings was examined
ented. In further implementations the additional landmarks
in this work. It focused on an universally applicable concept
should be omitted or partially integrated into the waypoint-
in combination with an intuitive and user-friendly handling.
carousel.
The evaluation revealed that reliable indoor navigation can be
Altogether, the navigation system performed very well. The
accomplished by the provided implementation. The proposed
software proved to be user-friendly and most participants
solution improves indoor navigation under certain circum-
could imagine to apply it in their daily life. Furthermore,
stances compared to classic solutions of way finding, such
the navigation software was classified as the most reliable
as a building map and oral instructions. This system can even
considered method because people were able to validate their
befurtherimprovedwiththeknowledgegainedduringthede-2012 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 13-15th November 2012
velopment and evaluation. Some of the possible improvement [13] J.KimandH.Jun. Vision-basedlocationpositioningusingaugmented
steps could be extracted from this work. realityforindoornavigation.IEEETransactionsonConsumerElectron-
ics,54(3):954–962,August2008.
The implemented navigation system should open up the area
[14] C.Kray.Situatedinteractiononspatialtopics.PhDthesis,Saarla¨ndische
of mobile phones equipped with smaller displays. The user Universita¨ts-undLandesbibliothek,2003.
interface has to be revised, i.e., a compromise between the [15] K.-H. Krempels, S. Patzak, J. Stu¨lpnagel, and C. Terwelp. Device
whispering: An approach for directory-less wlan positioning. In e-
size of a waypoint illustration and the amount of depicted
Business and Telecommunications, Communications in Computer and
information needs to be found. Additionally, the landmark InformationScience,pages346–357.SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,2011.
carousel has to be integrated into the waypoint carousel. [16] T. Lagenstein, S. Pullen, H. Jun, D. Yun, C. Kee, and B. Parkinson.
Centimeter-accuracyindoornavigationusinggps-likepseudolites.Tech-
Furthermore, the building-graph has to be extended. It should
nicalreport,GPSWorld,November2001.
be possible to map intermediate floors and areas with many [17] U. Leonhardt. Supporting location-awareness in open distributed sys-
branches. Another aim is to automatically reduce the sections tems. PhDthesis,1998. UniversityofLondon.
[18] J.Link,P.Smith,andK.Wehrle.FootPath:AccurateMap-basedIndoor
of a route and the textual instructions without complicating
NavigationUsingSmartphones. InInternationalConferenceonIndoor
the navigation. It was proven that an increased number of PositioningandIndoorNavigation(IPIN2011),pages21–23,September
segments in a route leads to a distorted perception of this 2011.
[19] E.Sadalla,L.Staplin,andW.Burroughs.Retrievalprocessesindistance
route’s length [19]. The route tends to appear longer than it
cognition. Memory&Cognition,7:291–296,1979.
really is.
Furthermore,inournextsteps,wewanttoanalyzetheusageof
pictographic illustrations instead of textual navigation instruc-
tions, e.g., arrows will be compared to textual instructions.
Pictures are perceived faster than textual instructions but usu-
allycontainlessinformationthantheirwrittencounterparts.It
has to be examined whether the pictographic instructions can
completely replace the textual instructions or just expand the
information.
Finally, we plan a user study in the Cologne-Bonn airport to
evaluate our navigation system in a real-world environment.
Thisbuildingcomplexallowsusanevaluationofalargeareal
with a highly frequented pedestrian traffic.
REFERENCES
[1] K.Baras,A.Moreira,andF.Meneses. NavigationBasedonSymbolic
SpaceModels. InInternationalConferenceonIndoorPositioningand
IndoorNavigation(IPIN2010),September2010.
[2] A. K. Beeharee and A. Steed. A natural wayfinding exploiting photos
inpedestriannavigationsystems. InProceedingsofthe8thconference
on Humancomputer interaction with mobile devices and services Mo-
bileHCI06,volume8,pages81–88,2006.
[3] B.BrumittandS.Shafer. Topologicalworldmodelingusingsemantic
spaces. In Proceedings of Location Modeling Workshop at Ubicomp,
2001.
[4] O. Chowaw-Liebman, U. Christoph, K.-H. Krempels, and C. Terwelp.
Evaluation of an indoor navigation approach based on approximate
positions. InWINSYS,pages195–201,2010.
[5] U. Christoph, K.-H. Krempels, J. von Stu¨lpnagel, and C. Terwelp.
Automaticcontextdetectionofamobileuser,pages1–6. 2010.
[6] J. E. Cutting and P. M. Vishton. Perceiving layout and knowing
distances:theintegration,relativepotencyandcontextualuseofdifferent
information about depth. In Handbook of perception and Cognition.,
volume5:PerceptionofSpaceandMotion,pages69–117.1995.
[7] E. W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs.
NumerischeMathematik,1(1):269–271,December1959.
[8] R. M. Downs and D. Stea. Kognitive Karten: Die Welt in unseren
Ko¨pfen. UTBfu¨rWissenschaft,1982.
[9] Y.Gu,A.Lo,andI.Niemegeers.Asurveyofindoorpositioningsystems
for wireless personal networks. Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
11(1):13–32,2009.
[10] C. Hide and T. Botterill. An integrated IMU, GNSS and image
recognition sensor for pedestrian navigation. In Proceedings of the
InstituteofNavigation,2009.
[11] L.Huey,P.Sebastian,andM.Drieberg.Augmentedrealitybasedindoor
positioning navigation tool. In Open Systems (ICOS), pages 256–260.
IEEE,2011.
[12] C.S.Jensen,H.Lu,andB.Yang.GraphModelBasedIndoorTracking.
2009 Tenth International Conference on Mobile Data Management:
Systems,ServicesandMiddleware,pages122–131,2009.