View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk brought to you by CORE
provided by CUAL Repository (Connacht Ulster Alliance Libraries)
To Wireless Fidelity and Beyond - CAPTURE,
Extending Indoor Positioning Systems
GaryCullen,KevinCurran,JoseSantos GearoidMaguire,DenisBourne
IntelligentSystemsResearchCentre,
UniversityofUlster,MageeCollege, LetterkennyInstituteofTechnology,
Derry,UnitedKingdom Co.Donegal,Ireland
Gary.Cullen@lyit.ie
Abstract—The benefits of context aware computing and Bluetoothbeacon.Thetestareaandexperimentswerethesame
specifically the context that location can provide to applications for both systems and the results were weighed to evaluate the
and systems has been heavily documented in recent times. best solution to solve the problem of range in Indoor
Moreover the move from traditional outdoor localization PositioningSystems(IPS).
solutions to the indoor arena has seen a dramatic increase in
researchintothisarea.Mostofthisresearchhassurroundedthe On loosing something or forgetting where you last placed
problemofpositioningaccuracy,withattemptstosolvethisusing something, a common piece of advice is to retrace your steps
a myriad of technologies and algorithms. One of the problems back in your mind. This can be quite a formidable task given
thatseemstobesomewhatoverlookedistheissueofcoveragein the multimodal transport available today coupled with the
anindoorlocalizationsolution.Themostlyunobstructedviewsof complexityandscaleofbuildingsweinteractwithonaregular
the Global Positioning System (GPS) which requires a mere 30 basis. The ability to place an avatar of yourself onto a map to
satellites to provide global coverage never had these problems. graphically retrace your steps in real-time would dramatically
Thedearthofliteraturearoundthisissueintheoutdoorarenais reduce the brain power required to remember everywhere you
testament to this fact. Unfortunately unobstructed views are not were at a given time. Googles maneuverings into the indoor
somethingthatcanbeachievedinmostindoorenvironmentsand location mappings realm [2] opens up the opportunity to
economical as well as physical barriers can prevent the
deliver thisvirtualreality, currentlybeingabletoprovidedoor
installationofaninfrastructuretoachievetotalcoverage.Inthis
to door route planning. Being able to navigate your way from
paper we propose a solution to this issue of indoor coverage by
your office desk out through your company’s building (taking
deployingasolutiontoextendtherangeofapositioningsystem-
the stairwell to avoid your boss in the lift) is eminently
Cooperatively Applied Positioning Techniques Utilizing Range
achievablealbeitwithasmallnumberoflocationsonamodern
Extension (CAPTURE). CAPTURE provides a system to locate
smartphoneusinggooglemaps.Alevelswitcherallowsyouto
devices that cannot be reached by an in-house location based
onionslicethroughmultiplefloorlevelplans,beforeswitching
system.Itpresentsauniquecontributiontoresearchinthisfield
to GPS to offer possible transport alternatives through the
byofferingtheabilitytoutilizedevicesthatcurrentlyknowtheir
locationwithinaLocationBasedSolution(LBS),tohelpevaluate outdoor environment. On reaching what ‘historically’ would
thepositionofunknowndevicesbeyondtherangecapacityofthe have been your destination, Google Indoor Maps and more
LBS. Effectively extending the locating distances of an Indoor importantlyanIPSpicksupwhereGPSleftoffofferingapoint
LBS by utilizing the existing mobile infrastructure without the topointnavigationsolution.Thiscanthentakeyouthroughthe
requirement for additional hardware. CAPTURE uses the complexities of an airport terminal for example, via specific
Bluetooth radios on mobile devices to estimate the distance waypointssuchassecurityand check-indesksdirectlyto your
between devices, before inserting these range estimates into a departuregate.
trilaterationalgorithmtoascertainposition.CAPTUREhasbeen
tested through experiments carried out in a real world One of the barriers to implementation of such a concept is
environment, proving the capacity to provide a solution to the the limitation in coverage and accuracy of currently
rangingissue. implemented Indoor Position or Location Based Systems [3].
IPSstypicallyutilize pre-existingWi-Finetworkinfrastructure
Keywords—Localization; Indoor positioning; Indoor taking ranging information from Wireless Access Points
localization; geographical positioning; Bluetooth; Cooperative (WAP’s) as inputs for a localization algorithm. Unfortunately
Positioning.) the driversbehind the strategic decisions on the positioning of
WAPs,inaWi-Fibasedsolution,weretypicallytocatchlarge
I. INTRODUCTION congregations of users and primarily to provide the highest
The firstiterationofCAPTURE described inthe following available throughput to those users. Coverage for IPSs is not
literature [1], used the RSSI readings taken from the IEEE necessarily to the forefront of network designer’s minds when
802.11radioonthemobiledevicestogaugetherangebetween designingsuchnetworks, leavinglarge areasbeyond the range
the devices by measuring the signal loss to estimate distance. ofanIPS.GPSontheother hand, offersnearglobalcoverage,
The version of CAPTURE implemented and evaluated in this barsomeissueswithurbancanyonsandotherhighrisenatural
paper uses the Bluetooth radio on the devices to estimate obstacles that prevent Line of Sight (LoS) to the just under 30
distancesbetweendevicesbasedontheRSSIreceivedfromthe satellitesrequired[4]todeliversuchwidescope.The indoor environment does not afford such clear Consider the following scenario where a user ‘Bob’, is in his
unobstructed views to and from tracking devices, the many favorite seat in the library, unfortunately the seat is in the far
doors, walls, floors, pillars and ceilings hinder the capacity of cornerofthelibrary,whichcanonlybe‘seen’byoneWireless
an IPS to locate devices. Furthermore the indoor arena is an Access Point. In this position Bob’s tablet can gain Wi-Fi
especially noisy atmosphere, being home to other wireless accessthroughthisAccessPointto allowhimaccessto online
devices such as Bluetooth Headsets, Cordless Phones and resources. However one AccessPointisnotenoughfor thein-
Microwave Ovens. All of these devices operate in the same house Location Based System to accurately locate Bob within
frequency band as the Wi-Fi solution, namely 2.4 GHz and the building using Trilateration positioning techniques. Sue is
therefore can interfere with the reception of signals used to sitting near the front of the library and can be ‘seen’ by 4
locate [3], making them behave in an unpredictable fashion. Wireless Access Points, and is thereby accurately located on
These environmental dynamics combine to dramatically affect theLocationBasedSystem.Sheisalso25meterstotheleftof
the abilityof an indoor solution to provide an acceptable level Bob and the Wireless Network Card on her Laptop can see
ofcoverage.LiteraturefromYang[4]andRowe[5]reflectthat Bob’s tablet. The Librarian is stacking books on the shelves
Location Awareness is rapidly becoming a fundamental behind where Bob is sitting and her smartphone is currently
requirement for mobile application development. This located within the Location Based System also. The wireless
highlights the challenges posed for ubiquitous localization of NIC on her smartphone can also ‘see’ Bob’s tablet, therefore,
devicesintheindoorarena.Consideringusersspendmoretime in a normal scenario, Bob would be beyond the range of the
in an indoor environment, over 88.9% according to a recent Location Based System, but because CAPTURE can use the
Canadian study [5], the need for a solution is obvious. We known positions of the Librarian and Sue and Bob’s position
proposeasolutiontothisissueofcoveragelimitationsbyusing relative to them it can accurately estimate Bob’s position
a cooperative localization technique, CAPTURE. CAPTURE within the library. Itprovidesa locationrelative to the devices
can plug into an in situ solution irrespective of the technology locating it, which can then be mapped onto a global overview
orlocationtechniquethatsolutioncurrentlyusestolocate. of the Location Based System (LBS), assisting in the
aforementioned scenario to get you to the departure gate in a
pointtopointnavigationsolution.
Figure1:SportsHallLyITisolation the variance grows bigger as people are walking.
The rest of this paper is laid out as follows; Section II
That is to say that the position estimation becomes less and
describes the system model used to implement CAPTURE.
less accurate the further the people being tracked travel.
Section III provides an overview of the experimental test bed
Implementing a hybrid solution incorporating Bluetooth RSSI
used to evaluate the solution and Section IV documents the
readings to measure the distance between devices,
data collected during testing. In Section V we describe the
dramatically improved positioning accuracy. Bluetooth has
findings of the experiments that were carried out, validating
been further used as a cooperative solution to the accuracy
the feasibility of the system, the penultimate section, Section
issueinIPS’s[7-11].
VI outlines the proposed implementation of CAPTURE and
the paper concludes Section VII, providing an insight into
someprojectedfutureworkwithCAPTURE. B. RSSI–ReceivedSignalStrengthIndicator
PossiblythemostpopularrangingtechniqueusedinIndoor
II. CAPTURE-SYSTEMMODEL
Localization, Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) is a
Thissectiondescribesasystemmodelthatcanbeusedina
measurement of the voltage that exists in a transmitted radio
localization solution to establish the Cartesian coordinate
signal, which is an indication of the power being received by
values of a lost device within a two dimensional plane.
the antenna. When a signal first leaves a transmitting device,
CAPTURE does not require a preceding calibration stage or a
thepowerofthe signaldropsorattenuates,thisistrueofboth
site survey, providing a robust opportunistic solution in
wiredandwirelesstransmissions.Asaradiosignalpropagates
dynamic environments, using only real time RSSI values. We
through the air some of its power is absorbed and the signal
use the term reference device to describe devices that
cooperatively assist in the positioning of lost or unknown losesaspecificamountofitsstrength,therefore,thehigherthe
devices.Traditionallythe termanchor node isused todescribe RSSI value (or least negative in some devices), the stronger
these devices, but this seems to elicit a perception of static or the signal. Knowing the amount of signal loss over a given
permanent devices, which in a cooperative solution these distance provides a method to calculate the distance from a
devices most certainly are not. Two key components typically transmitting device, given a Received Signal Strength. At its
makeuptheestimationofthepositionofalostdevice.Firstof most basic level this allows for the ‘coarse’ localization or as
all ranging techniques are used to estimate the distance from referred to in other literature, ‘presence-based localization’
the transmitting device(s) to the receiving device(s). This is [12]ofadevicerelativetothetransmittingdevice.Thiscanbe
calculatedusingametricforexamplethelengthoftimeittakes illustrated bythe RSSI calculated distance being the radius of
a signal to propagate the distance from the transmitter to the a circle and the ‘searching’ device being at the centre of that
receiver. The second component is the position estimation
circle. The estimated position of the lost device is anywhere
technique, here the ranging variables are calculated using one
on the circumference of that circle. In an IEEE 802.11
or more ranging techniques and these are used as input for an
network if the locations of the Access Points are already
estimationalgorithmtocalculatethepositionofthelostdevice.
known, then the location of Mobile Devices traversing the
A. CAPTURE–Bluetooth network can be located relative to them, albeit only to the
circumference ofthe radiusof the calculated distance. Further
CAPTURE was first implemented using RSSI
localization algorithms and position estimation filtering
measurements from the 802.11 radio on mobile device [1].
techniques must be applied to provide a more precise level of
The implementation of CAPTURE described in this paper
localization.
utilizes Bluetooth radio beacons to measure range. Bluetooth
In a cooperative paradigm, mobile devices can simulate
has been around for quite some time now, designed by phone
the role carried out by Access Points, providing a relative
manufacturer Ericsson in 1994, it was initially developed to
reference to a lost devices location. RSSI values can be
replacethethenageingRS-232andInfrared(IR)interfacesfor
extracted from beacons transmitted between devices within
connectingperipheraldevices. Itoperatesatthe same 2.4GHz
range. Correlation of these signal indicators and distance can
frequency as Wi-Fi and is specified in the IEEE 802.15.1
be estimated using many of the methods already applied
standard.TheoverridingbenefitofusingBluetoothforIndoor
throughoutliteratureinthisarena[13-15].RSSIbasedormore
Localizationisitsavailabilityinnearlyeverymobiledevicein
broadly speaking, radio based Indoor Positioning Systems
use today. Using Bluetooth in a cooperative framework also
have had notoriously irregular environment variables such as
allows the user to remain connected to the 802.11 network
reflection, refraction, diffraction and absorption of radio
while simultaneously assisting in the location of others with
wavesthatcanimpactpositioningestimateddramatically[16].
Bluetoothradiosignals.Bluetoothtransmitsbeaconssimilarto
Although RSSI is a measure of signal loss, it is not a linear
802.11 radios and the strength of the signal received from
representationofhowmanydBmisactuallyreachingthecard.
these beacons can be captured and measured to provide a
If a signal indicator is reading -72, this means that it is 72
range estimate. Kloch et al [6] investigate effects in
dBm less powerful by the time it gets to your device.
Collaborative Indoor Localization as an example of self-
ExperimentaltestcarriedoutatanearlystagewithCAPTURE
organizing in ubiquitous sensing systems, using Bluetooth to
further extoled this assumption. Results of these tests can be
correctPedestrianDead Reckoning(PDR) drift. Theyanalyze
viewed in Table 1: 5 meter increments in Section V, Data
the collaborative approach as a solution to the indoor
Collection and Presentation. Crudely extracting the RSSI at
localization problem, and found that when using PDR in
givendistanceincrementstoattempttoderiveameterdistancebeing equal to a given dBm increase in RSSI reading was not Tocalculatetheexactpositionofthelostdeviceweneeda
going to yield any value worth using in any further third reference device. When we calculate the distance from
experiments. The authors in [17] advocate a solution utilizing thisfinalreferencedevicetothelostdeviceandconsideringwe
a RSSI smoothing Low Pass Filter (LPF) to minimize the alreadyknowthedistancefromtheotherreferencedevices.We
dynamicfluctuationoftheRSSIvalues. can then determine that the lost device can only be at one
specific position to match those three particular distance
estimations – the intersections of the three circles (see Figure
C. Trilateration 3). The ranging estimates calculated from the RSSI values in
Trilateration is a key component of the GPS position the tests were used as the inputs for the trilateration algorithm
estimation techniques. It is a process that can estimate the ontheCAPTURE,toprovideanestimateonthepositionofthe
positionofamobiledevicegiventhepositionsofatleastthree lostphones.
other objects and the distance fromthose objects to the device
III. EXPERIMENTALTESTBED
to be located. In the scenario depicted below in Figure 2(a),
illustrated using a cooperative localization example, the circle In this section, we will provide evidence showing the
depicts the distance from a reference device to a lost device. suitability of CAPTURE as a solution to the indoor ranging
This distance would have been derived using the RSSI value problem. To do that we carried out a large campaign of
between the reference and lost devices. All we can say about measurements in the Sports Hall in Letterkenny Institute of
the whereaboutsofthe lostdevice isthatitresidessomewhere Technology illustrated in Figure 1. The hall offers a 40m
on the circumference of the circle that isconstructed using the diagonal testing range, providing Line of Sight measurements
radiusof the estimated measurement between the two devices. for alltests, ascanbe seen inthe picture depicted in Figure 4.
A second reference device will allow the position of the lost When readings were been recorded all users vacated the hall,
device to be narrowed further as can be seen in Figure 2(b). this provided an optimal environment to use as a benchmark
Now the ranging estimates of the lost device have been forfuturetestsonCAPTURE.
calculated relative to the second reference device also.
Therefore considering the lost device must be on the
circumference of the circles created bythe distance between it
and the two reference devices there are only 2 possible
positions where it might be, the intersections of these two
circles.
Each phone used in the test is given a name (BSSID)
TestPhone1, TestPhone2 for example. CAPTURE reads the
RSSI of all available reference points, i.e. all devices it can
‘see’,butitfiltersoutonlythetestphonesselectedbytheuser
carryingoutthetests.Thiscanbeseenintheimageinfigure5,
and is achieved via a lookup table mapping the MAC address
of the phone to the phone name. This allows the use of onlya
specifiedphoneoragroupofphonesduringanygiventest.
Figure2:(a)SingleDistance (b)With2ndReferenceDevice
A. SystemComponents
Figure4: TestEnvironment
The experimental setup of the prototype consisted of 7
SamsungGT-S5310GalaxyPocketphones(Figure5),running
Google Android 2.2.1 on a 600 MHz ARMv6, Adreno 200
GPU,QualcommMSM7227chipset,wereusedtocarryoutthe
evaluationoftheCAPTUREsystem.3ofthephoneswereused
as reference devices, the other phone acted as the lost device.
All phones used during the test were of an exact make and
modelsoastoruleoutanyissueswithvariedRSSIreadswith
different antenna types. Some of these issues have been
describedintheliterature[18,19].Lishengetal.,[19]gosofar
as to describe the distortion being as much as 11.2 dBm out
with different antenna types over a 25 meter read range.
Although these issues referenced above describe problems in
the 802.11 realm, it is the author’s opinion that these could
haveanimpactonBluetoothradiosignalsalso.
Figure3:TrilaterationExampleWhere:
n:PathLossExponent
d:Distancefromtransmittingdevice
A:Receivedsignalstrengthat1meterdistance
The path loss exponent typicallyvaries from1.5 to 4, with
1.5 representing a free-space Line of Sight (LoS) value and 4
representing an environment that incorporates a high level of
signal attenuation. Not having a good equation modeling the
environment in which your experiments are to be deployed,
will be reflected in horrible results. After initial pre-tests were
evaluated,aPathLossExponentof1.5wasdeterminedforthe
test environment, because of the open plan design of the Hall
offering LoSbetween alldevicesand the RSSI at1 meter was
measured at -66.8194. The results of the collected data are
describedinthefollowingsection.
Figure5:TestPhones
IV. DATACOLLECTIONANDPRESENTATION
Duringthetestsallphoneswereplaceatadistanceof80cm Here we present all of the data collated throughout this
abovefloorlevel,tomimicasclosetoarealworldexampleof work,thedatasetsareillustratedinthegraphandtable.During
a user holding them. The phones were placed on identical the recording of data the hall was emptied of people so as to
platforms during the tests to negate the impact of Hand-Grip provideacleansetofresults.Aninitialtestwasruntoestablish
body-loss effect which can also impact ranging measurements the1meterrangeforinputintothealgorithminequation1,the
[18]. Device orientation can also introduce errors when results of this test can be seen in Figure 6. The fluctuations in
calculating signal range estimates, so all phones had the same the meter range values was one of the notable differences
orientationwhenusedinourtests[20]. betweenthetestsrecordedinthe802.11versionofCAPTURE
versus the Bluetooth version. In the Wi-Fi version meter read
 Database
values were captured from -42 to -45. Here, as can be seen in
A MySQL Server version: 5.0.96 hosted on a Linux the graph readings ranged from -62 to -77, a difference of
platform was used to store all data collected by the devices. 3dBm was recorded in the Wi-Fi test, with a difference of
The server was online and the phones wrote directly to it as 15dBmintheBluetoothexperiments.
theyrecorded RSSI valuesfromeachother.Thedata wasthen
passedthroughalowlevelfiltertoremoveanyoutliers,before
1 Meter RSSI values
an average RSSI reading was calculated for each required
ranging measurement, to be used in the trilateration algorithm
toestimatethepositionofthelostdevice. -80
 Laptop
-75
A Dell Latitude E6440 iCore3 running Windows 7
Professional was used to develop the app to gather the RSSI
-70
from the phones. An algorithm was designed to convert this
RSSIreadingintoarangingmeasurementbeforeatrilateration
algorithm converted the ranging measurements into Cartesian -65
coordinate values. We used the Eclipse IDE and Android
Software Development Kit (SDK) for Android development
-60
anddebugging,todeveloptheapp.
Figure6:1meterreadings
B. RangingMeasurementEstimation
The RSSI valuescaptured fromthe beacons transmitted by
500readingswererecordedatvariouslocationsthroughoutthe
deviceswithinrange ofthe ‘lostdevice’ were used toestimate
hall, to accurately obtain the meter value for the algorithm,
the relative distance between them. As explained earlier RSSI
these were smoothed with a filter before the final average was
values do not provide a linear representation of distance. The
calculated.
authors in [17] advocate using the formula in “(1),” below to
estimateRSSI,andtherebyextrapolatedistancegivenRSSI: Further testswere thencarriedoutto measurethe accuracy
of both the RSSI values received and the resulting range
estimations from the algorithm. Table 1 below, depicts the
RSSI=-(10nLog10(d)+A) Equation(1) resultsofteststo capture theRSSI valuesbetweentwo phones
at 5 meter increments diagonally across the hall. It highlights
the RSSI value beginning at -72.3793 for the 0-5 meter range.A sample set of 200 readings were recorded per section, an Theyalsoknowthedistancebetweenthemselves:
average was then taken from this set. The standard deviation
 TestPhone1toTestPhone2is15meters
was also documented to illustrate any fluctuations in the
received values. In our previous experiments with CAPTURE  TestPhone1toTestPhone3is13meters
using Wi-Fi [1] the standard deviation was typically low, in
this case using Bluetooth as can be seen in the table below  TestPhone2toTestPhone3is17meters
standard deviation ranges from 4.2 to 2.9, these are large
fluctuationsfromtheaverage.
TheRSSIreadingsfromthe:
Distance 0-5m 0-10m 0-15m 0-20m
 LostPhonetoTestPhone1is-77.5351dBm
Average -72.3793 -74.8966 -76.6333 -76.3103
StdDev 4.1140 3.6327 3.9603 3.9226  LostPhonetoTestPhone2is-78.8457dBm
Estimate 3.73 7.62 11.20 9.69
 LostPhonetoTestPhone3is-76.1021dBm
Distance 0-25m 0-30m 0-35m 0-40m
Average -80.6205 -80.9657 -80.2759 -83.3103
These RSSI readingstranslateto a rangingestimate of13.345,
StdDev 4.1062 3.3776 4.2823 2.9490
15.1221 and 9.349 meters respectively when put through the
Estimate 28.82 29.38 27.87 49.95
rangingalgorithm.
Theactualdistancebetween:
Table1:5meterincrements
 TestPhone1andtheLostPhoneis11.5meters
The average was then inputted into the algorithm to derive
a range estimate based on the RSSI values received. As  TestPhone2andtheLostPhoneis13.2meters
mentioned before RSSI values do not provide a linear
 TestPhone3andtheLostPhoneis11.9meters
representation of measurement, and therefore some of the
increments do not initially seem like they could assist in Givinganapproximateaverageerrorrateof2.5meters.
finding a distance at a given measurement. The ranging
From the schematic of the test pictured in Figure 7
estimatesshowanerrorhighof11.31metersatthe0-20meter
CAPTURE’s visualizer module (Figure 8) graphically depicts
rangeandlowof.62metersatthe0-30meterrange.
the positions of the cooperative reference devices on screen
V. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS along with the actual and estimated positions of the lost
device. The positions of the 3 reference devices are entered
Figure 7 depicts one of the tests where CAPTURE
accurately locates a lost phone within 2.5 meters. TestPhone1, into the visualizer manually, whichcanbe seeninblue on the
TestPhone2 and TesPhone3 know their location, via the in- screen. The position of the lost device is also entered, it is
houseIPS. illustrated in red on the screen. The application then reads in
the RSSI values before estimating the position of the lost
device,showningreenhereonthescreen.
Figure7:FindingLostPhone
Figure8:Visualizermodule[5] C.J.Matz,D.M.Stieb,K.Davis,M.Egyed,A.Rose,B.Chou,et
VI. CAPTURE–SYSTEMIMPLEMENTATION al., "Effects of Age, Season, Gender and Urban-Rural Status on
Time-Activity: Canadian Human Activity Pattern Survey 2
InorderforCAPTUREtobeabletocooperativelylocatea
(CHAPS2),"Internationaljournalofenvironmentalresearchand
lostdevicewithina network,theremustbeatleast3reference publichealth,vol.11,pp.2108-2124,2014.
deviceswithinsightofthelostdevice.Eachofthesemusthave [6] K. Kloch, G. Pirkl, P. Lukowicz, and C. Fischer, "Emergent
‘a prior’ knowledge of their location within a preexisting behaviourincollaborativeindoorlocalisation:Anexampleofself-
localization solution. The hypothesis of CAPTURE was to organisation in ubiquitous sensing systems," in Architecture of
ComputingSystems-ARCS2011,ed:Springer,2011,pp.207-218.
extend the range of in-house IPS’s, and tests shown in both
[7] A.Baniukevic,D.Sabonis,C.S.Jensen,andL.Hua,"Improving
have proven that it can achieve exactly this. Existing IPS’s
Wi-Fi Based Indoor Positioning Using Bluetooth Add-Ons," in
have dramatically more powerful infrastructure than what MobileDataManagement(MDM),201112thIEEEInternational
CAPTURE would utilize though. For example 230 volt AC Conferenceon,2011,pp.246-255.
powered Access Points in a standard IPS versus 12 volt DC [8] S.Aparicio,J.Perez,A.M.Bernardos,andJ.R.Casar,"Afusion
method based on bluetooth and WLAN technologies for indoor
poweredmobilereferencedevices(smartphones,tabletsand\or
location," in Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent
laptops) in a cooperative solution. It would be naive to think
Systems, 2008. MFI 2008. IEEE International Conference on,
thataccuracylevelsofanin-houseIPSwouldalso‘extend’toa 2008,pp.487-491.
cooperative model, although this does not take away from the [9] F.J.Gonzalez-CastanoandJ.Garcia-Reinoso,"Bluetoothlocation
solution to the range issue that CAPTURE provides. The networks," in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2002.
GLOBECOM'02.IEEE,2002,pp.233-237vol.1.
implementation of a more comprehensive filter would
[10] C. Liang, H. Kuusniemi, C. Yuwei, P. Ling, T. Kroger, and C.
nonetheless assist with accuracy for example the Kalman or
Ruizhi, "Information filter with speed detection for indoor
Extended Kalman Filters are recommended in the following Bluetooth positioning," in Localization and GNSS (ICL-GNSS),
literature[7,21]. 2011InternationalConferenceon,2011,pp.47-52.
[11] Z. Sheng and J. K. Pollard, "Position measurement using
VII. CONCLUSION Bluetooth,"ConsumerElectronics,IEEETransactionson,vol.52,
pp.555-558,2006.
ThispaperintroducesCAPTUREacooperativelocalization
[12] A.E.Kosba,A.Saeed,andM.Youssef,"RobustWLANDevice-
systemusingBluetooth,thatprovidesasolutiontotheproblem free Passive motion detection," in Wireless Communications and
of devices being out of range of a hosted Indoor Positioning Networking Conference (WCNC), 2012 IEEE, 2012, pp. 3284-
System. Although the earlier implementation of CAPTURE 3289.
[13] D.Gualda,J.Urena,J.C.Garcia,E.Garcia,andD.Ruiz,"RSSI
using802.11provided more accurateresults,experiments with
distance estimation based on Genetic Programming," in Indoor
the Bluetooth version of CAPTURE still demonstrate that
Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2013 International
utilizingacooperativeframeworkofmobiledevicescanextend Conferenceon,2013,pp.1-8.
therangeofaninsituIndoorPositioningSystembyatleastthe [14] M. O. Gani, C. Obrien, S. I. Ahamed, and R. O. Smith, "RSSI
range of the outermost devices located within the system. Based Indoor Localization for Smartphone Using Fixed and
Mobile Wireless Node," in Computer Software and Applications
While CAPTURE using 802.11 [1] provides a more accurate
Conference(COMPSAC),2013IEEE37thAnnual,2013,pp.110-
solution, CAPTURE Bluetooth can actively transmit and
117.
receive beacons while still connected to the Wi-Fi network, [15] S. Shioda and K. Shimamura, "Anchor-free localization:
something the 802.11 version cannot currently achieve. Estimation of relative locations of sensors," in Personal Indoor
Disconnectingauserfromanetworktoallowthemtoassistin and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2013 IEEE 24th
the localization of another device is not something that would InternationalSymposiumon,2013,pp.2087-2092.
[16] L.Erin-Ee-LinandC.Wan-Young,"EnhancedRSSI-BasedReal-
lead to large scale adoption of a solution. Wi-Fi Direct
Time User Location Tracking System for Indoor and Outdoor
proposes to solve the issue of peer-to-peer communication
Environments," in Convergence Information Technology, 2007.
during network connectivity. The implementation of a Wi-Fi InternationalConferenceon,2007,pp.1213-1218.
directversionofCAPTUREissomethingthatthenextiteration [17] J.Joonyoung,K.Dongoh,andB.Changseok,"AutomaticWBAN
ofCAPTUREwouldhopetoinclude. arearecognitionusingP2Psignalstrengthinofficeenvironment,"
in Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 2014 16th
InternationalConferenceon,2014,pp.282-285.
REFERENCES
[18] F. D. Rosa, X. Li, J. Nurmi, M. Pelosi, C. Laoudias, and A.
Terrezza,"Hand-gripandbody-lossimpactonRSSmeasurements
[1] G.Cullen,K.Curran,andJ.Santos,"CAPTURE- Cooperatively for localization of mass market devices," in Localization and
Applied Positioning Techniques Utilizing Range Extensions," in GNSS (ICL-GNSS), 2011 International Conference on, 2011, pp.
5th International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor 58-63.
Navigation(IPIN2014),IEEE,Busan,Korea,2014,pp.22-29. [19] X. Lisheng, Y. Feifei, J. Yuqi, Z. Lei, F. Cong, and B. Nan,
[2] M.AlyandJ.Y.Bouguet,"Streetviewgoesindoors:Automatic "Variation of Received Signal Strength in Wireless Sensor
pose estimation from uncalibrated unordered spherical Network," in Advanced Computer Control (ICACC), 2011 3rd
panoramas," in Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2012 InternationalConferenceon,2011,pp.151-154.
IEEEWorkshopon,2012,pp.1-8. [20] K. Kaemarungsi and P. Krishnamurthy, "Properties of indoor
[3] G.Cullen,K.Curran,andJ.Santos,"Cooperativelyextendingthe received signal strength for WLAN location fingerprinting," in
rangeofIndoorLocalisation,"inSignalsandSystemsConference Mobile and UbiquitousSystems: Networking and Services, 2004.
(ISSC2013),24thIETIrish,2013,pp.1-8. MOBIQUITOUS2004.TheFirstAnnualInternationalConference
[4] G.M.DjuknicandR.E.Richton,"GeolocationandassistedGPS," on,2004,pp.14-23.
Computer,vol.34,pp.123-125,2001. [21] S. S. Saad and Z. S. Nakad, "A Standalone RFID Indoor
Positioning System Using Passive Tags," Industrial Electronics,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 58, pp. 1961-1970, 2011.