© Nottingham University Press
icccbe2010 Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computing in Civil and Building Engineering
W Tizani (Editor)
Analysis of three indoor localization technologies to support facility
management field activities
Saurabh Taneja, Asli Akcamete, Burcu Akinci, James Garrett, Lucio Soibelman
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
E. William East
Engineer Research and Development Center, USA
Abstract
Facility management (FM) related field activities often involve accessing and reading
manuals/specifications/drawings and exchanging information about a specific building element that is
being worked on among different FM personnel (Lee et al. 2009). Such information retrieval and
exchange is referred to as contextual retrieval and exchange in this paper because it is contingent upon
accurate knowledge of: 1) the activity (task) being performed; and 2) the location of person/object in
the facility. Assisting retrieval of contextual information requires determining the granularity (i.e.,
accuracy) of the location information, which is needed by FM personnel. The authors identified three
main requirements for determining FM personnel location information using localization technology:
1) sub-room level (2-3m) accuracy; 2) greater than 95% precision; and 3) no-line-of-sight required to
deploy transmitters/receivers for localization. Three technologies were selected for evaluating their
capabilities in fulfilling the requirements identified for indoor localization to support facility
management related field activities: 1) Radio Frequency Identification Tags (RFID); 2) Wireless
LAN (WLAN); and 3) Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs). These three localization technologies
were selected based on the fact that they do not require line of sight, are scalable and low cost. The
authors used a fingerprinting approach, which involves creation of a signal strength map for
localization, and the k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) algorithm for location determination. Several
Experiments were carried out to evaluate, for each of these technologies, accuracy and precision.
These experiments also helped in assessing the reliability of received signal strengths over two
variables: 1) time; and 2) direction/orientation for the same point/location. All of the technologies
have been tested on the same floor of an actively used university building, following the same path on
different days. The paper concludes with the comparison of performance of the three selected
technologies over the requirements identified for indoor localization.
Keywords: indoor localization, fingerprinting, kNN, RFID, WLAN, IMUs
1 Introduction
Operations and maintenance (O&M) related activities constitute a major part of facility management
(FM) to ensure effective functioning of facilities. O&M is the longest phase in the building lifecycle
and consequently approximately 85% of the total building lifecycle cost is spent in O&M (Liu et al.
1994; Teicholz, 2004). Several researchers have worked on providing computational/mobile support
to O&M activities, such as asset management, preventive maintenance and maintenance history
tracking to reduce facility lifecycle O&M cost (Wing, 2006; Junghanns et al., 2009; Legner andThiesse, 2006; Ko, 2009; Ergen et al., 2007; Motamedi and Hammad, 2009). Many of these
applications involve utilizing location information for equipment and component tracking. At the
same time, little work has been done to evaluate indoor localization technologies to assess their
applicability in supporting the above-mentioned applications. In addition, FM personnel carrying out
field activities, such as accessing and reading manuals/specifications/drawings, getting information on
necessary materials/tools, documentation, and arranging collaboration with co-
workers/subcontractors, require interaction with actors/systems that are not located at the activity site
(Lee et al. 2009). The actors/systems, not located at the activity site, require field personnel location
information in appropriate detail (accuracy) to support the O&M personnel carrying out their field
activity (Hammad et al., 2004) for example for locating a shut-off valve in a mechanical room and
guiding the user to the right location, a navigation system might require to know user position at 2-3m
accuracy level.
This paper evaluates indoor localization technologies against the requirements identified for
supporting facility management field activities. Indoor localization is the process of determining the
location of a person/object in an indoor environment (Hightower and Borriello, 2001). The authors
observed staff at a regional hospital and identified three metrics for evaluating of indoor localization
technologies: 1) accuracy; 2) precision; and 3) no-line-of-sight requirement, i.e., the ability of a
sensing technology to localize a person/object even when the person/object is not in the line of sight
of any sensor. The authors have defined the accuracy requirement as the ability of a localization
technology to localize the user within a certain distance and precision requirement as the ability to
reproduce the required accuracy over time.
Section 2 of this paper overviews some major requirements of localization technologies to support
field O&M activities, Section 3 provides an overview of the background research on indoor
localization, Section 4 describes the details of the research approach and Section 5 contains the
description of the test-bed, experimentation methodology and results.
2 Detailed requirements
O&M field activities often involve working in dense mechanical environments and locating the
desired object/equipment on the site. These field activities might also require identification of
object/equipment obscured by false ceiling tiles or other objects. Visual search and identification
consumes a great deal of time on site. Hence, there is a need to present the field personnel with
location information, corresponding to a particular sub-space in a particular room, in which the field
personnel has to perform his/her task. We refer to such location information as sub-room level (2-3m
accuracy) and it can reduce the time spent by field personnel by guiding him/her to the right location.
Dense mechanical environments also present a limitation on placing many transmitters that require
line-of-sight for localization. Hence, a localization technology that provides sub-room level (2-3m)
accuracy with no line-of-sight requirement is needed. O&M field activities, just like other industrial
processes, also need to implement quality control to improve services delivered to occupants (Holtz
and Campbell, 2004). Hence the selected localization technology should be able to provide sub-room
level accuracy at 95% precision to ensure smooth execution of O&M tasks most of the time.
3 Background research
This section provides a brief overview of the various sensing technologies available for localization
and the various algorithms available for analysing the sensed data (i.e., algorithms for localization).3.1 Indoor localization technologies
Current sensing technology for indoor localization can be broadly classified into three categories
based on the physical principle involved for sensing: 1) Wave propagation based technologies; 2)
Digital imaging based technologies; and 3) Motion sensing based technologies. Wave propagation
sensing exploits various properties of waves, such as phase and angle of waves, and covers a wide
range of frequencies of electromagnetic and sound waves, such as radio waves (300 kHz to 3 GHz),
infra-red waves (300 GHz to 300 TeraHertz), sound waves (frequencies greater than 20kHz) and
ultrasonic waves (Finkenzeller, 2003; Miller et al., 2006; Want et al., 1992; Skibniewski and Jang
2007; Kim and Choi, 2007). Amongst all ranges of frequencies, radio waves are the most widely used
for localization since they have a longer range and are relatively less costly (Hightower and Borriello
2001).
Image based localization involves image-matching and digital image processing techniques.
Usually, a database of visual characteristics of an indoor environment is created by capturing digital
images and then the images collected by a mobile agent carrying an image capture device are matched
to the stored images to determine the current location of the user (Ferdaus et al. 2008). This approach
is susceptible to changes in indoor environments as well as occlusions in a scene at a given point in
time.
Motion sensing is based on detecting human motion through accelerometers and gyroscope.
Coupling a magnetometer along with accelerometer and gyroscope can provide rate and direction of
movement (Fraden, 2003). This is the principle involved in an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and
is called the Dead Reckoning (DR) technique. DR involves fusing current movement rate, motion
type (walking or running), and direction of motion with the known location at previous time step, to
determine how far and in what direction the user has moved in the current time step. IMUs are
susceptible to drift errors and require correction points along the user’s path (Pradhan et al., 2009a).
3.2 Techniques for localization
The techniques for indoor localization are mainly classified into three broad categories: 1) Range-
based; 2) Range-free; and 3) Fingerprinting (Biaz and Ji, 2005). Range-based techniques calculate
distances between receivers and transmitters and may include time-of-flight, time-delay-of-flight,
time-of-arrival and angle-of-arrival calculations (Liu et al., 2009). Range-based techniques usually
involve placing the transmitters in the line-of-sight of the mobile receivers, as the reflection from the
indoor environment can cause a change in wave properties, such as time, angle or phase of arrival.
Range-free techniques include the use of proximity to associate the position of a user with the location
of the transmitter that is the most strongly read by the user’s receiver/tag/mobile device. The third
type of broad technique, called fingerprinting, involves creating a map of signal strength of the
transmitters beforehand and then matching the received signal strength characteristics to the created
signal strength map for location determination. The following section describes the technologies and
techniques selected in this research for evaluation against the requirements identified for localization
for fieldwork in operations and maintenance.
4 Research approach
This section provides the description of the process of selecting several indoor localization
technologies and techniques, and specific algorithms for localization for further evaluation.
4.1 Selected localization technology
Indoor environments can be dense, hence they might present a challenge to range-based localization
as this technique usually requires line-of-sight to accurately calculate wave propagation time, angle orphase (Liu et al., 2009). Providing the sub-room level accuracy desired by O&M personnel by using
range-based methods might require installing a large number of transmitters or receivers throughout a
facility to ensure that there are no blind spots. This might turn out to be costly. Hence, we decided
not to include the range-based technologies, such as Ultra-Sonic, Ultra-Wide band and indoor GPS,
which require line-of-sight, in our evaluation. Some non-range-based technologies, such as GSM,
infrared, TV signals and Bluetooth, were also not selected since previous research studies reported
low accuracies for these technologies (Rabinowitz and Spilker, 2005; Otsason et al, 2005; Bruno and
Delmastro, 2005; Want et al, 1992). Based on the background research, the authors selected Radio
Frequency (RFID), wifi (WLAN) and Inertial Measurement unit (IMU) for evaluation considering the
requirements identified in Section 2. None of the above-mentioned three technologies requires line-of-
sight for localization. Previous research studies have reported the localization accuracy of RF-based
technologies to be around 10 meters (Bahl and Padmanabhan 2000; Elnahrawy et al. 2004). IMU is
also selected as it is infrastructure independent and can function even if there is a power outage.
4.2 Selected localization technique
The authors chose fingerprinting (signal strength map creation) over range-based (time-of-flight,
angle-of-arrival, time-of-arrival, time-delay-of-arrival) and range free (proximity based) methods for
WLAN and RFID technology. Fingerprinting involves using received signal strength (RSS)
measurements for localizing the receiver of these signals, which can be done even when the wave
propagation characteristics of the indoor environment are not known. Moreover, fingerprinting
approach does not require line-of-sight, and hence can perform well with a limited number of
transmitters in dense environments, such as mechanical rooms. The third selected technology, IMU,
requires implementation of the Dead Reckoning technique, because it is a motion-based localization
technology as compared to WLAN and RFID, which are wave-propagation based technologies.
4.3 Selected algorithm for fingerprinting
The authors selected the k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) algorithm for determining location from a
fingerprint map. kNN belongs to the set of deterministic fingerprinting algorithms, whereas
algorithms like the Bayes Classifier belong to the set of probabilistic fingerprinting algorithms. With
limited training data, deterministic classifiers, having fewer parameters to configure, perform better
than probabilistic classifiers (Hossain et al. 2007). The next section describes the details of the test-
bed and implementation of the algorithms for fingerprinting, as well as the results of evaluation of the
three selected technologies.
5 Test-bed description and results
This section provides the details of the test-bed and experimentation procedure to evaluate WLAN,
RFID and IMU technologies against the requirements identified for supporting facility management
field activities.
5.1 Test-bed description
All the selected technologies were evaluated in the basement of a building with concrete walls,
metallic environment (lockers, artifacts hanging from walls etc.) and many overhead pipes. The test-
bed for WLAN and RFID consists of a 270 ft long hallway on which signal strengths of Wireless
Access Points and RFID tags were measured every 1.52m or 5 ft, which corresponds to two human
strides (Ladetto et al. 2000) and this distance provides the necessary granularity to achieve the
required accuracy without making the user collect data at a large number of points. Existing wireless
infrastructure was used for testing WLAN. A freely available wireless signal strength measurementsoftware, NetStumbler (http://www.netstumbler.com/), was utilized for measuring signal strengths of
different access points. Figure 1 depicts the test-bed with the position of some access points located
near the test-bed, as well as the location of RFID tags and the test-path for IMU. The selection and
placement of RFID tags were done in a previous research project (Pradhan et al. 2009b) and RFID
data was analyzed to study the variation of RFID signal strength over longer time spans. Pradhan et al
(2009b) placed the RFID tags strategically so that the user could collect signal strength data from at
least two different tags at every point. The RFID tags are ultrahigh frequency (915Mhz) passive tags
with long non-directional reading range (30-90m) and have a battery life of 5-6 years but the battery is
non-rechargeable. IMU data was collected over three different routes in the same test-bed. The
lengths of the IMU test-paths are 250m, 160m and 157m. The first and the second routes are
highlighted in Figure 1 and the third route is a route similar in shape to route 1, located in a different
section of the same floor on which the test-bed is located.
Figure 1. Description of the test-bed for the evaluation of WLAN, RFID and IMU
5.2 Details of the experiment
Signal strength data for WLAN and RFID signals were collected for 55 points, along the hallway,
separated 1.52m (5ft) apart; signals were collected in all four directions at each point. WLAN and
RFID data were collected in two phases. In the first phase, WLAN data was collected by a handheld
portable computer on 5 different days; in the second phase, conducted recently, three months after the
first phase, the WLAN data was collected by a laptop over 6 days. The first phase of RFID data was
collected and analyzed by Pradhan et al. (2009b); the second phase was collected recently over 6
days. A laptop was used for collecting data in both phases of RFID data collection using the software
supplied by the RFID device vendor and a PCMCIA card. The analysis of the collected data for
WLAN and RFID signals was done using the kNN algorithm for fingerprinting. The kNN algorithm
has been implemented for 10 different cases for each day of data collection (Table 1); the
implementation details for different cases of kNN are described in Pradhan et al. (2009b). For the
IMU data, a portable handheld computer was used to link to the IMU and data from the IMU was
collected using the software provided by the IMU manufacturer. IMU data was collected over three
routes, visited eight times each and the device itself gave as output the coordinates of every time point
with respect to the starting point, which were plotted to find the route calculated by the IMU.
5.3 Results
The results of fingerprinting using WLAN and RFID signals were analyzed based on the percentage
of time the algorithm could identify the actual location of the user within a certain distance. The
accuracy of the IMU approach was assessed as the difference between the starting point and the
ending point (drift error) when a user closed the loop. Figure 2 shows the resulting accuracy usingWLAN data collected by the handheld computer in phase one of data collection. The best result is
obtained in case 1 of kNN implementation where the algorithm is able to identify the location of the
user within 1.52m (5ft) of the correct location, 95% of time. The second phase of WLAN data
collection was carried out using a laptop and retrieved a duplicate Wifi access point for every room,
which caused the accuracy of the approach to decrease. We are currently investigating the reason for
reading duplicate access points. The analysis of RFID data in the second phase carried out in this
research study resulted in poor accuracies. Pradhan et al (2009b) had reported accuracies of around
10.7m for greater than 93% confidence in best case during the first phase but due to the reduced signal
strength of most of the installed RFID tags read in this phase of data collection, the accuracies of
localization went down. The authors are currently investigating the cause of the reduced readings of
signal strength values from RFID tags installed four years ago. For the IMU data, it was observed that
there was a very high error for route one (13.1m) whereas the error observed for route two was 5.18m
and route three was 2.89m. We are currently investigating the features of route one that could have
caused a high error in the case of route one. Table 2 summarizes the accuracy and precision of the
three evaluated technologies.
Table 1 Different case for implementation of kNN algorithm
Case Case name Training data set creation Test data set creation
# SS=signal strength
1 Avgof4Dir Average of SS for all directions Average of SS for all directions
2 Avgof4Dir(South) A(cid:523)verage of SS for all (cid:524)directions Average of SS for south direction
3 AvgofSouthDir(South) Average of SS for South direction Average of SS for south direction
4 Avgof4Dir(Random) Average of SS for all directions Average of SS for a random
5 AvgofRandomDir(Random) Average of SS for a random Average of SS for a random
direction direction
6 Maxof4Dir Max of SS among all directions Max of SS among all directions
7 Maxof4Dir(Random) Max of SS among all directions Max of SS in a random direction
8 Maxof4Dir(South) Max of SS among all directions Max of SS in south direction
9 MaxofSouthDir(South) Max of SS in south direction Max of SS in south direction
10 MaxofRandomDir Max of SS in a random direction Max of SS in a random direction
Figure 2: Accuracy of WLAN for different cases of kNN Figure 3: Accuracy of IMU for route one
Table 2: Summary of accuracies of the three technologies based on experiments done till date
Technology Average accuracy of 5 samples 95 percentile accuracy
WLAN 0.58m (Best case kNN) 1.52m (Best case kNN)
RFID 11.9m (Best case kNN) >30m
IMU 13.1m drift error at the end of 250m route 1 18.6m6 Conclusions and discussion
WLAN satisfied all the requirements of indoor localization technology identified in this paper. Even
when we reduced the density of wifi access points from 32 different access points to only 9 different
access points read in the test-bed, the accuracy fell only to 3.05m, for 95% confidence. RFID
technology based localization had poor results in our implementation. One of the possible reasons can
be the fact that the RFID tags, which were installed four years ago, are being read only at close range
in the current phase of data collection. The reason for decreased transmission power of these RFID
tags is yet unknown but needs to be inspected in detail. The IMU data showed a varying trend of
accuracy, which can be dependent on the indoor environment features that can cause the
magnetometer to output erroneous readings. One way of determining this environment dependent
IMU error might be to utilize Building Information Models (BIM) to identify properties of spaces and
materials that can cause a high magnetometer error. If the sources of errors can be accurately
identified, IMU can be an effective means of localization along with WLAN, especially when the
WLAN or other sensor infrastructure is down.
References
BAHL, P., and PADMANABHAN, V. N. 2000. RADAR: An In-building RF-based User Location and Tracking System.
Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM 2000, Tel Aviv, vol. 2, 775-784.
BIAZ, S., JI, Y. 2005. A survey and comparison on localisation algorithms for wireless ad hoc networks. International
Journal of Mobile Communications, v 3, n 4, p 374-410.
BRUNO, R., DELMASTRO, F. 2003. Design and analysis of a Bluetooth-based indoor localization system. Lecture Notes in
Comput. Science, Vol.2775, p 711-25, 2003
ELNAHRAWY, E., XIAOYAN, L., and MARTIN, R. P. 2004. The Limits of Localization using Signal Strength: A
Comparative Study. First Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications
and Networks, 406-414.
ERGEN, E., AKINCI, B., EAST, B., KIRBY F. 2007. Tracking components and maintenance history within a facility
utilizing radio frequency identification technology, Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, ASCE 21 (1) 1120.
FERDAUS, S. N., VARDY, A., MANN, G., and GOSINE, R. 2008. Comparing Global Measures of Image Similarity for
Use in Topological Localization of Mobile Robots. Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering,
2008, 913-918.
FINKENZELLER, K. 2003. RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identification, Wiley.
FRADEN, J. 2003. Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs, and Applications, Springer.
HAMMAD, A., GARRETT JR., J. H., KARIMI, H. A. 2004. Location-Based Computing for Infrastructure Field Tasks. In:
KARIMI, H. A., HAMMAD, A. eds. Telegeoinformatics: Location-Based Computing and Services, CRC Press, pp.287-
314.
HIGHTOWER, J. BORRIELLO, G. 2001. Location systems for ubiquitous computing, Computer, v 34, n 8, p 57-66
HOLTZ, R. and CAMPBELL, P. 2004. Six Sigma: Its implementation in Ford's facility management and maintenance
functions. Journal of Facilities Management, v 2, no. 4, p 320-329.
HOSSAIN, A. K., MAHTAB, M., VAN, H. N., JIN, Y., SOH, W. S. 2007. Indoor localization using multiple wireless
technologies. 2007 IEEE Internatonal Conference on Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems, MASS, US
JUNGHANNS, S., SCHALL, G., SCHMALSTIEG, D. 2009. Employing location-aware handheld augmented reality to
assist utilities field personnel. Available online: www.icg.tu-graz.ac.at/Members/schall/lbs_abstract.pdf/download, Last
accessed: November 2009
KIM, BYOUNG-HOON, CHOI, JONG-SUK 2007. Active beacon system with the fast processing architecture for indoor
localization. 12th IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, ETFA 2007
Proceedings
KO, CHIEN-HO 2009. RFID-based building maintenance system. Automation in Construction, v 18, n 3, p 275-284
LADETTO, Q., GABAGLIO, V., MERMINOD, B. PH., and SCHUTZ, Y. 2000. Human walking analysis assisted by
DGPS. Global navigation satellite system, GNSS, Edinburgh, U.K.
LEE, S. AKIN, O. 2009. Shadowing tradespeople: Inefficiency in maintenance fieldwork. Automation in Construction, v 18,
n 5, p 536-546.LEGNER, C., THIESSE, F. 2006. RFID-based maintenance at Frankfurt airport, IEEE Pervasive Computing 5 (1) 34–39.
LIU, H., DARABI, H., BANERJEE, P., LIU, J. 2007. Survey of wireless indoor positioning techniques and systems. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics Part C: Applications and Reviews, v 37, n 6, p 1067-1080
LIU, L.Y., STUMPF, A.L., KIM, S.S., ZBINDEN, F.M. 1994. Capturing as-built project information for facility
management, Proc. the First Congress held in conjunction with A/E/C Systems'94, 1994, pp. 614–621, USA.
MOTAMEDI, A., HAMMAD, A. 2009. Lifecycle management of facilities components using radio frequency identification
and building information model. Electronic Journal of Information Technology in Construction, v 14, p 238-262
OTSASON, V., VARSHAVSKY, A., LAMARCA, A., DE LARA, E. 2005. Accurate GSM indoor localization. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, v 3660 LNCS, p 141-158, 2005
PRADHAN, A., AKINCI, B., GARRETT JR., J. H. 2009a. Development and testing of inertial measurement system for
indoor localization. Proceedings of the 2009 ASCE International Workshop on Computing in Civil Engineering, v 346, p
115-124.
PRADHAN, A., ERGEN, E., AKINCI, B. 2009b. Technological assessment of radio frequency identification technology for
indoor localization. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, v 23, n 4, p 230-238.
RABINOWITZ, M., SPILKER, J.J., JR. 2005. A new positioning system using television synchronization signals. IEEE
Transactions on Broadcasting, v 51, n 1, p 51-61
SKIBNIEWSKI, M. J., JANG, W. S. 2007. Localization Technique for Automated Tracking of Construction Materials
Utilizing Combined RF and Ultrasound Sensor Interfaces. Computing in Civil Engineering 2007, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA, 78-78.
TEICHOLZ, E. 2004. Bridging the AEC technology gap. IFMA Facility Management Journal, March–April, 2004,
Retrieved on February 10, 2007, from http://www.bricsnet.com/content/Teicholz.pdf.
WANT, R., HOPPER, A., FALC, V., and GIBBONS, J. 1992. The Active Badge Location System. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 10(1), 91-102.
WING, R. 2006. RFID applications in construction and facilities management, Electronic Journal of Information in
Construction, v 11, p 711-721.