2014 Eighth International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing
Indoor Taxi-Cab: Real-Time Indoor Positioning and Location-Based Services with
Ekahau and Android OS
Caner Kilinc, Seraj Al Mahmud Mostafa, Raihan Ul-Islam, Kashif Shahzad, and Karl Andersson
Pervasive and Mobile Computing Laboratory
Luleå University of Technology
SE-931 87 Skellefteå, Sweden
{kilcan-0@student., sermos-9@student., raiuli-0@student., kassha-0@student., karl.andersson@}ltu.se
Abstract—Positioning and routing in outdoors environment that Taxi geometry comes by and takes advantage of lower
is still challenging especially in complex buildings, where a code complexity such as decreased memory consumption
number of buildings are combined with tunnels and bridges, and execution time of the computation.
and the GPS signal is unreachable. Looking for a particular
Indoor positioning systems (IPSs) with accurate, reliable
room in an unfamiliar huge indoor environment or a product
in an enormous store is time wasting and a real life problem and real-time location updates has always been significantly
that everybody faces on a daily basis. This paper presents a challenging, where there are a lot of physical barriers
solution using the Ekahau positioning system and Android OS depending on radio signal absorption or obstruction in a
with an intermediary server, which acts between these two large indoor space with lots of corridors, floors, rooms and
systems to provide actual room level positioning by a objects. For IPSs there are several systems that have been
mathematical modeling technique. The system also provides provided including RFID, WLAN, UWB, ZigBee, infrared
the shortest path to a target destination by using Dijkstra's and ultra sounds, etc. Lots of studies have been done and
search algorithm. The optimal distance between the locations is remarks that specific calibration techniques are needed to be
modeled based on the Taxi-cab geometry distance definition able to obtain accurate positioning and mapping results
for the mobile clients. Additionally, the users can also display related with site characteristics. Previous work provide an
the shortest path for items in the vicinity such as coffee
overview of indoor positioning techniques [4][5][6].
machines, etc. The proposed solution has been evaluated in a
real life setting at basement floor level. The following techniques are available:
Keywords: Indoor Positioning; Indoor Location-based • Radio Map (RM): RM definition provides the
Services; Ekahau; Mathematical Modelling; Dijkstra's Search variations of the RSS values from the AP’s. It also
Algorithim; Taxi-Cab geometry; Android OS gives detailed information on cell size and the
distances of APs. However, using the RM
I. INTRODUCTION
definition database helps in accuracy to track
In 2013, the number of connected mobile devices devices. The RSS values are immediately
reached 10 billion [1] and the amount of smart phones usage compared with the recent signal strength while a
reached to 1.4 billion: 798 million of them are Android moving device receives any signal from an
based devices and 294 million are iPhone [2]. Nowadays, AP [7][8]. RM definition table does not store any
Billions of users are using Global Navigation Satellite new data. It only compares the new received values
System (GNSS) such as Global Positioning System (GPS) from the device with the RSS locations. So, it
[3], which is the most well-known. GPS technology relies
becomes quite easy to detect user accurate location
on signals from multiple satellites and employs a
immediately.
triangulation process to determine physical locations with an
• Motion Estimation: In the literature, a number of
accuracy of about 33 feet (10 meters).
object motion estimation methods are described
Many business and private zones are already covered by and used [4] e.g. the radio-frequency (RF) based
wireless networks for connecting laptops, PDAs and mobile RADAR system: Radar is a sensor, which can be
phones. These devices could be tracked simply by adding placed on walls in order to gather Wi-Fi signal
enabling software. However, GPS technology cannot be strength information at multiple locations to
used effectively in dense urban areas, due to blind spots, triangulate the object’s coordinates [9][10].
weak radio signals, and other signal interference factors.
These both given techniques are used together by Crowd-
The lack of GPS-based location services in huge buildings
sourcing Localization [11][12][13]. Last but not least,
reinforce to fuse smartphones and Wi-Fi signal strength to
Simultaneous Location and Mapping (SLAM) can be given
enable positioning using Euclidean geometry distance
as an additional example, which is an active research project
calculation. This paper presents Taxi geometry for the
for more than 20 years [14][15].
distance computation, which has so far, to best of our
knowledge, not been used for this purpose. The reason is
978-1-4799-4331-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEE 223
DOI 10.1109/IMIS.2014.99A number of IPSs have been developed based on these horizontally and vertically considered in this computation to
fundamental techniques. Each system takes advantage of a get from a certain point A to point B. The same destination
particular positioning technology or combining some of computation technique is used while determining the
these technologies and [5] introduces and evaluates different distance across the rooms and corridors. Also it is used
commercially available and research-oriented IPSs. while drawing an optimal route for the users due to the user
As a solution to the addressed problems and challenges, cannot pass through the wall. Therefore, they have to follow
this paper presents Indoor Taxi-Cab for real time indoor the corridors like a taxi follows the streets to reach a
positioning and services. Indoor Taxi-Cab uses Ekahau targeted destination. Additionally, the user also can request
Positioning Engine (EPE) as a tool to obtain users’ (x, y) a shortest path for the nearest item via the Android
coordinates by using the signal strength mapping and the application, which will also be handled in the intermediary
motion estimation techniques in a composition. The server.
determined coordinates are handled at an intermediate
The remainder of the paper is structured in the following
server where the users’ room level location is determined
way. Section 2 indicates related work, while Section 3
and based on the demand a shortest path is provided, with
describes our system architecture. Section 4 concludes,
Dijkstra's algorithm based on Taxi-Cab geometry distance
provides evaluation and discusses the results.
definition, for a certain destination or a closest item e.g.
Xerox machine or Coffee machine.
II. RELATED WORK
EPE offers a practical 802.11b-based Wireless LAN Recently, there is striking development on the real time
indoor positioning system that requires no proprietary indoor positioning. Feldman et al. [23] proposed a model for
hardware additions to the network and obtains clients’ location estimation using a triangular method. They used
location from Ekahau tags which is an RFID (Radio RSSI (radio signal strength indicator) and the distance
Frequency Identifier) [16] that transmits coordinates of the between sender and the receiver. Gu et al. [5] and Lui et al.
client to the EPE over Wi-Fi. EPE is designed to be used as [6] provided survey studies of indoor positioning systems
a WLAN positioning server, or integrated with vertical for wireless personal networks. Shin et al. [7] introduced an
software applications or hardware. It is a powerful Java™ indoor user tracking system. The system constructs a
software component that provides user and asset coordinates topological map with Wi-Fi signal calibrations, assigns
(x, y, floor) and tracking features to client applications [17]. semantically meaningful labels into the map, and estimates
the semantic location of the user based on the current Wi-Fi
EPE services have not yet been provided for Microsoft’s
signal strength observation. Eventually, the proposed system
and Apple’s mobile operating systems. Therefore, an
was the first Wi-Fi fingerprinting-based SLAM
additional Java based intermediary server allows us to
implementation. Lau et al. [7] presented the Density-based
provide the positioning and location based services to any
Cluster Combined Localisation Algorithm that uses the
kind of mobile users. In the proposed system, an Android
unsupervised technique to recognise meaningful locations.
application is implemented and evaluated as a mobile client.
The results prove that the DCCLA is able to detect
Furthermore, the intermediate server determines users’ fingerprints of Wi-Fi signal strengths and does not require
exact room level location based on the (𝑥,𝑦) coordinates users’ input. Godana et al. [9] developed Radar technology
with a mathematical modeling technique which increases in order to monitor and operate remotely human activity in
Ekahau’s capability while decreasing the error rate by room the form of a set of Doppler frequency. Regarding the
level location detection. Based on the Dijkstra's Search results in the study, the system is able to estimate the
Algorithm the shortest path is computed to the requested velocity profile of the person’s translational movement with
less than 10% error. Bahl et al. [10] performed a similar
target destination [18][19] where each room or each nearest
study and presented results. Rai et al. [11] proposed the Zee
item is defined as a node. Dijkstra’s algorithm provides a set
system, which makes the calibration zero-effort, by enabling
of nodes/room names as an output. Those rooms need to be
training data to be crowd sourced without any additional
visited to reach the destination and it is eventually the
location input from users. Rai’s experimental results
shortest path. The intermediate server transmits to the
highlight that WiFi-based positioning techniques, both
Android Client and updates in real time whenever users’
fingerprinting-based and modeling-based, are able to
coordinates are changed.
perform accurate localization, when crowd sourced data is
Furthermore, the Indoor Taxi-Cab solution provides an using Zee. Ali et al. [13] implemented algorithms such as
optimal route to a desired destination. At this phase, Taxi- the Super Resolution Matrix Pencil (MP) algorithm, which
gives a better estimation for TOA (time of arrival), as the
Cab geometry is exploited which is unique. Taxicab
TOA has superior performance over the Fourier transform
geometry was defined by E. F. Krause [20] and is very
technique, so it is important to estimate the TOA accurately
similar with the Euclidean coordinate geometry. Definition
to identify any object. Johnson et al. [18] examine the
of points and lines are the same as well as the angles are
Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm and evaluated at [19]
measured in the same way [21]. The difference is that
whether it is suitable for iterative routing for the operation
computation of distances which is not calculated as the crow
of culler multi-hop networks based on various scenarios.
flies, but as a taxi would drive. The number of blocks
224The study shows that better delay and cost performance can Note in the figure that the distances between any of the
be achieved by the iterative algorithm. rooms and corridors are abstract to provide a crystal clear
picture.
Finally, Li et al. [20] studied privacy-preserving location
sharing in mobile online social networks. They observed Whenever measured a pair of axes e.g. (x , y ) are
u u
that users’ real fake identities could potentially be leaked to obtained for a user from the Ekahau server, function 𝑓
location service providers. Li et al. [20] therefore proposed
identifies the exact room number where the Android client
an improved mechanism that employs dummy queries and a
is located and that is defined as below for the rectangular
private set intersection protocol to prevent the online service
rooms;
network service and location service providers from
learning individual information from each other.
𝐴, 𝑥 <𝑥 <𝑥 , 𝑦 <𝑦 <𝑦
! ! ! ! ! !
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 𝑓 𝑥 !,𝑦
!
= (2)
𝐵, 𝑥 <𝑥 <𝑥 , 𝑦 <𝑦 <𝑦
The implementations and experiments are carried out at ! ! ! ! ! !
the university campus, in a basement corridor at a building.
Our Indoor Taxi-Cab system architecture consists of three
different components:
1. Ekahau Server (Ekahau Positioning Engine)
2. An Intermediate Server
3. An Android application and Ekahau Tag
as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 2: Mathematical Modeling for Room Level Location Determination
Furthermore, a circular room, with center C=(h. k) and
radius r is modeled as follow;
(𝑥−ℎ)!+(𝑦−𝑘)! =(𝑟)! (3)
Figure 1: Indoor Taxi-Cab Overall System Architecture. This modeling is done and it can be done for any kind of
room regardless its shape, due to that there are lots of well-
Ekahau tag is carried around by the Android Clients.
known linear calculation techniques and formulas in
The tag measures the Wi-Fi signal strengths from a number
analytic geometry to determine whether a certain per of axes
of different Wireless Access Points and sends the position
is in a geometric shape or not.
of the strongest signal to the Ekahau server to determine
accurate (x, y) position of the users. The Ekahau server Even if the (x, y) coordinates of the user have been
continuously obtains the user’s position from the Ekahau tag erroneously detected, e.g. by one meter, there is a higher
and sends it to the Intermediate server in real time. possibility that the user is still in the same room or corridor.
The Intermediate server has been developed by us in Therefore, the mathematical model used increases Ekahau’s
order to determine the user’s room level position on a capability while decreasing the error rate by room level
relevant indoor map. It also provides an optimal route to a location detection. Additionally, one or a number of key
certain target destination which can be a room or an item, points are identified in each room and corridor in order to be
e.g. nearest a copy or coffee machine. The system works as used at the next step.
the following.
Once the user’s current located room is determined then
First, all rooms and corridors are defined by an a small circle is sketched, on the relevant area of the map.
individual set of unique x and y coordinates, e.g. room A is Then an optimal walking route, from the current location to
modeled as (x y ). the targeted destination, is computed.
a, a
As shown in Figure 2 any room can be identified by a set of Dijkstra's algorithm is used in order to find the shortest
unique x and y coordinates for instance: a rectangle room A walking path and the algorithm works according to the
is defined as follows: following. First, the current location is set as the starting
point/node and set to zero as the value (starting point is
𝐴= (𝑥 !,𝑦 !) 𝑥 !≤𝑥 !≤𝑥 !, 𝑦 !≤𝑦 !≤𝑦 !, 𝑎∈ℕ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑥,𝑦∈ℝ (1) zero) of the current node, which is shown in Figure 3.
225Second, the current node will be the closest unvisited where 𝜙 is a set of rooms and corridors (represented as
neighbouring node of the current node. It is worthwhile to nodes in the algorithm).
keep in mind that the distance between the nodes is The identified key points for the corridors are as
calculated based on Taxi-Cab geometry destination following; 𝐾(𝑥 ,𝑦 ) is in blue horizontal
! !
definition, which is explained later on in this section. corridor, 𝑃 𝑥 ,𝑦 and 𝑃 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ) in grey vertical corridor,
! ! ! ! ! !
and 𝐷(𝑥 ,𝑦 ) is in green horizontal corridor
! !
where 𝐾𝑃 ⊥ 𝑃 𝑃 ⊥ 𝑃 𝐷 and 𝐾𝑃 ∥ 𝑃 𝐷
! ! ! ! ! !
hence 𝐿(𝑥 , 𝑦 ) can be found where 𝐾𝐿 ⊥ 𝐷𝐿 .
! !
According to Pythagorean Theorem in Euclidean
geometry, the shortest path between 𝐾(𝑥 ,𝑦 ) and
! !
𝐷 𝑥 ,𝑦 has been calculated by
! !
𝐾𝐷 !=𝐾𝐿!+ 𝐿𝐷 !
𝐾𝐷 != 𝑥 −𝑥 !+ 𝑦 −𝑦 ! (5)
! ! ! !
Figure 3: Dijkstra's Algorithm
On the current node, the distance to every unvisited
node, which is directly connected to the current node, is
considered by calculating the total distance between an
unvisited node and the value of the current node.
Afterwards, the unvisited node is marked with this
calculated value, if it is less than its current value. Note that,
if the path to it through the current node is shorter than the
Figure 4: Taxi-Cab Geometry Distance Definition
previously known paths, the node is relabelled. After the
distances are determined to each neighbouring nodes, the
The significant difference in Taxi-Cab geometry that the
current node is coloured as visited and select the closest
shortest path between 𝐾(𝑥 ,𝑦 ) and 𝐷 𝑥 ,𝑦 , is shown
! ! ! !
unvisited node as the current node. with a red route on the figure above, has been defined by
Dijkstra's algorithm also defines two sets of nodes: 𝐾𝐷 = 𝐾𝑃 + 𝑃 𝑃 + 𝑃 𝐷
! ! ! !
OPEN and CLOSED. An OPEN node means that the set of
𝐾𝐷 =𝑑 𝐾,𝑃 + 𝑑 (𝑃 ,𝑃 )+ 𝑑 (𝑃 ,𝐷)
vertices to process while a CLOSED node includes vertices !! ! !! ! ! !! !
already processed. Therefore, the coloured nodes will not be
𝐾𝐷 = 𝑥 −𝑥 + 𝑦 −𝑦 + 𝑥 −𝑥 (6)
! ! ! ! ! !
revisited or returned to.
Due to the given definition Taxi-Cab distances between
The searching process for selecting the neighbouring the rooms and corridors are computed and stored in the
nodes with the shortest distances continues colouring the Intermediate server. The key points are linked as a walking
current node as visited and moving onto the closest path based on the request.
unvisited neighbour node until the target destination node is
Finally, the optimal route is determined and plotted on
coloured as visited. Once the target destination node is
the map and it is transmitted to the Android client. Figure 5
coloured as visited, that means the shortest path is
shows an additional feature that a user can request for a
determined and as output a list of nodes in a visiting order is
nearby item, while Figure 6 shows the user having selected
obtained, which needs to be visited one by one to reach to
a particular room name to get the optimal route. Finally,
the target destination in the given order.
Figure 7 shows a typical response.
In order to draw a route to the desired destination, Taxi-
cab geometry is exploited as follows; Figure 4 gives an
example where a user is standing at a point 𝐾(𝑥 ,𝑦 ) and
! !
wants to go to point 𝐷 𝑥 ,𝑦 , based on this demand as
! !
explained above, first the shortest path is determined with
Dijkstra's algorithm. In this case the output of the Dijkstra's
algorithm is
𝜙= 𝑅𝑒𝑑 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑜𝑟,𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑦 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑜𝑟,𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑜𝑟 (4)
226IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We provided an efficient system for indoor positioning.
Users of the system were pleased and excited by having
such an application where they could be helped by our
Indoor Taxi-Cab system to know the exact direction and
location in a complicated indoor environment where a
number of buildings are linked via tunnels and bridges.
The proposed system relies on a commercially launched
Ekahau indoor positioning product while obtaining the
users’ coordinates based on Wi-Fi radio signal strength
measurements. Unfortunately, the system inherits the
Ekahau’s limitations related to performance and
pricing. Furthermore, the cost of mapping the campus along
Figure 5: User can request for a nearby item with licenses can be quite high.
Our future work includes testing alternative open source
systems to obtain the users’ coordinates. Also, we intend to
extend the system and to develop our own Wi-Fi positioning
engine. Finally, we intend to port our system to iOS and
Windows 8.
In conclusion, the main problem is to balance the
performance load, how to distribute processing power
between the clients and server, and how to utilize limited
bandwidth.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Part of this work is a result of the NIMO (Nordic
Interaction and Mobility Research Platform) project [24]
supported by the EU Interreg IVA North program.
REFERENCES
[1] http://techcrunch.com/2012/02/14/the-number-of-
mobile-devices-will-exceed-worlds-population-by-
Figure 6: User requests for a destination 2012-other-shocking-figures/
[2] http://www.businessinsider.com/15-billion-
smartphones-in-the-world-22013-2
[3] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Positioning_Syste
m
[4] P. Bissig, R. Wattenhofer, and S. Welten. (2013). A
Pocket Guide to Indoor Mapping. Proc. WPNC
[5] Y. Gu, A. Lo, and I. Niemegeers. (2009). A Survey of
Indoor Positioning Systems for Wireless Personal
Networks. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
IEEE 11(1):13-32
[6] H. Liu, H. Darabi, P. Banerjee, and J. Liu. (2007).
Survey of Wireless Indoor Positioning Techniques and
Systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews
37(6):1067-1080
[7] M. Ficco, C. Esposito, and A. Napolitano. (2014).
Calibrating Indoor Positioning Systems with Low
Efforts. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
13(4):737-751
[8] S. L. Lau, Y. Xu, and K. David. (2011). Novel Indoor
Figure 7: The shortest path for a certain destination Localisation using an Unsupervised Wi-Fi Signal
Clustering Method. Proc. FutureNetw
227[9] B. Godana, G. Leus, and A. Barroso. (2010).
Estimating Indoor Walking Velocity Profile using a
Software Radio-based Radar. Proc. SENSORDEVICES
[10] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan. (2000). RADAR: An in-
building RF-based User Location and Tracking System.
Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
[11] A. Rai, K. Chintalapudi, V. Padmanabhan, and R. Sen.
(2012). Zee: Zero-effort Crowdsourcing for Indoor
Localization. Proc. Mobicom
[12] M. Lee, H. Yang, D. Han, and C. Yu. (2010).
Crowdsourced Radiomap for Room-level Place
Recognition in Urban Environment. Proc. IEEE
PERCOM Workshops
[13] A. Ali and A. Omar. (2005). Time of Arrival
Estimation for WLAN Indoor Positioning Systems
using Matrix Pencil Super Resolution Algorithm. Proc.
WPNC
[14] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey. (2006). Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping: Part I. IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine 13(2):99-110
[15] T. Bailey and H. Durrant-Whyte. (2006). Simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM): Part II. IEEE
Robotics & Automation Magazine 13(3):108-117
[16] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio-
frequency_identification
[17] http://www.ekahau.com/
[18] D. Johnson. (1973). A Note on Dijkstra's Shortest Path
Algorithm. Journal of the ACM 20(3):385-388
[19] D. Johnson, D. Maltz, and J. Broch. (2001). DSR: The
Dynamic Source Routing Protocol for Multi-hop
Wireless Ad Hoc Networks. Ad hoc networking,
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing, pp. 139-172
[20] J. Li, J. Li, X. Chen, Z. Liu, and C. Jia.
(2014). MobiShare+: Security Improved System for
Location Sharing in Mobile Online Social Networks.
Journal of Internet Services and Information Security
4(1):25-36
[21] E. Krause. (1973). Taxicab geometry. The Mathematics
Teacher 66(8):695-706
[22] E. Krause. (1987). Taxicab geometry: An adventure in
non-Euclidean geometry, DoverPublications.com
[23] S. Feldmann, K. Kyamakya, A. Zapater, and Z. Lue.
(2003). An Indoor Bluetooth-based Positioning System:
Concept, Implementation and Experimental Evaluation.
Proc. International Conference on Wireless Networks
[24] NIMO Project (2014). Available at
http://www.nimoproject.org
228