Heriot-Watt University
Research Gateway
A semantic approach to enrich user experience in museums
through indoor positioning
Citation for published version:
Duque-Domingo, J, Cerrada, C, Valero, E & Cerrada, JA 2017, A semantic approach to enrich user
experience in museums through indoor positioning. in S Ochoa, P Singh & J Bravo (eds), Ubiquitous
Computing and Ambient Intelligence. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10586 LNCS, Springer, pp.
612-623, 11th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence UCAmI 2017,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States, 7/11/17. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67585-5_60
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1007/978-3-319-67585-5_60
Link:
Link to publication record in Heriot-Watt Research Portal
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Published In:
Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence
Publisher Rights Statement:
This is a post-peer-review, pre-copyedit version of an article published in Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
The final authenticated version is available online at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67585-5_60
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via Heriot-Watt Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and /
or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by
the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
Heriot-Watt University has made every reasonable effort to ensure that the content in Heriot-Watt Research
Portal complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact open.access@hw.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 21. נוב׳. 2024A semantic approach to enrich user experience
in museums through indoor positioning
Jaime Duque Domingo1, Carlos Cerrada1, Enrique Valero2, and J.A. Cerrada1
1 UNED, ETSI Informa´tica,
Departamento de Ingenier´ıa de Software y Sistemas Informa´ticos,
C/Juan del Rosal, 16. 28040 Madrid, Spain
jaimeduque@amenofis.com
2 Heriot-Watt University, School of Energy, Geoscience, Infrastructure and Society,
Edinburgh EH14 4AS, United Kingdom
Abstract. This article presents a novel ontology aiming to connect an
IndoorPositioningSystem(IPS)toEuropeana,theEuropeanUniondig-
italplatformforculturalheritage.Themainpurposeofthissystemisto
deliverinformationaboutCulturalHeritageObjects(CHO)tousersnav-
igatinginmuseums,whentheyapproachcertainpiecesofart.Although
different semantic works have been previously published regarding the
problem of finding optimal paths with IPS, the novelty of this work is
the combination of indoor positioning and a semantic view of cultural
objects. This ontology enriches the experience of users and offers a new
way of enjoying art. The paper shows the effectiveness of the proposed
ontology to connect a widely known database to a wireless positioning
system. The potential of the developed method is shown using data ob-
tainedfromtheRoyalMuseumsofFineArtsofBelgium,oneofthemost
important European art galleries, with more than six thousand master
pieceslistedinEuropeana.Someexperimentshavebeenalsocarriedout
intheOldmastersMuseum,oneoftheconstituentmuseumsoftheRoyal
Museums that is dedicated to European painters from the 15th to the
18th centuries.
Keywords: indoor positioning, WPS, RGB-D sensors, WiFi position-
ing, fingerprint, depth map, OWL, ontology, SPARQL, ubiquitous com-
puting,userexperience,Europeana,RoyalMuseumsofFineArtsofBel-
gium
1 Introduction
ModernIndoorPositioningSystems(IPS)facilitatestheinteractionofuserswith
theenvironment,estimatingthepositionofpeopleorobjectsinsideabuilding[9].
This kind of systems can be useful in certain environments, where the location
of users is considered as a trigger for different operations (e.g., enable or disable
machines, open doors, information management ...).
This interaction between people and the environment involves a set of con-
cepts,entitiesandtherelationshipsamongthem,whicharedefinedintheontol-2
ogy. In this article, a novel ontology is presented aiming to connect a previously
developed IPS [12] to Europeana.
Europeana [17] is the European Union’s digital platform for cultural her-
itage,givingaccesstodifferenttypesofcontentfromdifferentinstitutions.More
than 3,000 institutions across Europe have contributed to Europeana. The col-
lectionsletusersexploreEurope’sculturalandscientificheritagefromprehistory
to the modern day. The digital objects in Europeana are stored in the cultural
institution and are hosted on their networks. Europeana collects contextual in-
formation ormetadata aboutitems.Thedata.europeana.euLinkedOpenData
pilotdatasetcontainsopenmetadataonapproximately2.4milliontexts,images,
videos and sounds.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 explores previous
works related to the techniques used in this article. In Section 3, the developed
ontologyisdescribed,illustratinghowitislinkedtothepositioningsystemsand
how the navigation system works. Finally, Section 4 shows carried out exper-
iments and Section 5 remarks the main features of the presented system and
proposes future works.
2 Overview of related work
2.1 WPS and RGB-D Positioning
WiFiPositioningSystems(WPS)aremainlyfoundedonthefingerprintingtech-
nique [19]. This technique creates a map of the environment recording, in each
point, the received signal from a mobile phone (i.e. Received Signal Strength In-
dication (RSSI)) . This map is used afterwards to obtain the position of a user
in real-time, comparing the values received from the user’s portable device to
those stored in the map.
One of the main advantages of WPS solutions with respect to similar tech-
nologies (e.g., RFID or Bluetooth) is the use of devices commonly installed in
inhabited environments (i.e. routers), whereas other solutions require dedicated
infrastructure.Also,WPScanbeusedtoprovideInternetaccessaimingtoshare
information.
With respect to people and objects positioning, some technologies based on
computer vision (e.g., RGB-D sensors) have been increasingly used to deliver
more precise results, such as the method Kinect Positioning System (KPS), an-
alyzed in [22]. A more complex solution is shown in [24], where the authors
present an indoor human tracking application using 2 depth-cameras. More re-
cently, in [26], authors proposed a model for merging Kinect trajectories. Using
theglobalcoordinatesatthesametimestamp,theirsystemisabletodetermine
the distance between two skeletons in order to discern between different users.
ThedevelopedIPSpresentedbyourteamin[12]combinestwowidely-known
technologies:(WPS),extensivelyusedinindoorpositioning,andcomputervision
by means of RGB-D sensors. The trajectory of users is considered in both ways:
exploitingtheWPStrajectoryandthetrajectoryoftheskeletonsoftheusersin3
thedepth map.Theskeletonsareobtainedbymeansofthetechniquespresented
in [27] [6], where authors propose new algorithms to quickly and accurately
predict 3D positions of body joints from depth images. The mentioned IPS is
the base of the work presented in [13], where the system tracks the position of
visitors in a museum.
2.2 Knowledge engineering
Inthefieldofcomputerscience,anontology[15][14]isthedefinitionandclassi-
ficationofconceptsandentities,andtherelationshipsbetweenthem.Ontologies
useentitiesintheuniverseofdiscourse(e.g.,classes,relations,functions,orother
objects)andformalaxiomsthatconstraintheinterpretationandwell-formeduse
of these terms. They can be represented in the W3C Web Ontology Language
(OWL) [8], which is a Semantic Web language designed to represent knowledge
about things, groups of things, and relations between them.
Inthelastdecade,differentapproacheshavebeenpresentedtodeliverseman-
tic views of the indoor navigation problem. In [28], authors propose an Indoor
Navigation Ontology (INO), which supports the path searching and the presen-
tation of tasks of a navigation system. More recently, an extended version of
INO is used in [20], in which an augmented reality solution is also considered to
provide a richer experience. Another approach for indoor routing was developed
by [11], where authors propose a different ontology (ONALIN) that provides
path searching for individuals with special needs and preferences. In [18], au-
thors present a location-based service (LBS) to figure out the path between a
starting point and a destination. This is based on an ontology that enriches the
standardpositioningsinceuserscanshare,manageandquerydatasemantically.
OGC GeoSPARQL [7] offers support for representing and querying geospatial
dataontheSemanticWeb.However,itismostlypreparedtorepresentgeometry
topology, like polygons, instead of being used as a tool for positioning purposes.
2.3 About data in Europeana
Europeana is a project developed by the European Commission to incentive
member states to digitalize and enhance digital preservation in Europe. The
portal provides free access to a wide array of digital content. It allows in a sim-
ple but powerful way to find resources from all over Europe. It contains over
50 million records. These featured datasets represent over a million of the best,
openly licensed, directly accessible media objects - books, photos, art, artefacts,
audio clips and more. Europeana has several ways to retrieve data. Informa-
tion can be obtained by REST API Standard over HTTP, which returns JSON
data,orbyAnnotationsRESTAPI,whichreturnsJSON-LD.Otherpossibilities
include OAI-PMH Harvest data via the OAI-PMH protocol and Linked Open
Data Queries retrieving data in SPARQL. Data can also be linked to external
data sources, such as the Swedish cultural heritage aggregator, GeoNames, the
GEMET thesaurus or DBPedia.4
The use of an ontology in this system, in order to connect it to Europeana,
facilitates a dynamic behavior, adding new functionalities in a simpler manner
without modifying data models.
3 Analysis of the system
Asmentionedinprevioussections,themainpurposeofthisworkisthedevelop-
ment of an ontology that links an indoor positioning system to the Europeana
database,aimingtodeliverinformationaboutCulturalHeritageObjects(CHO)
tomuseums’users,consideringtheirlocationinsideabuilding.Thisinformation
about master pieces is retrieved from the database through SPARQL queries.
Even if this system could be applied in every museum in Europe whose
works are stored in Europeana database, Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Bel-
gium (Brussels, Belgium) has been chosen to illustrate this paper. Consider,
for instance, the search for information about the famous painting of Rogier
Van der Weyden “D´eploration”. After the corresponding SPARQL query, the
information shown in Table 1 is provided.
Longitude and latitude coordinates of the Royal Museums can be easily re-
trieved. However, the position of the pieces inside the museum is not in Euro-
peana. Therefore, it is needed to create another relation giving the precise room
and position of a masterpiece to be used with the developed system. In order to
do that, an ontology has been created.
Table 1: Result for the query of “D´eploration”
CHO http://data.europeana.eu/proxy/provider/2048001/AthenaPlus
identifier ProvidedCHOKIKIRPABrusselsBelgiumAP10325768
title “D´eploration”@fr
creator “VanderWeyden,Rogier”@fr
date “1441/1464”
type “tableau[peinture]”
subject “event”
format “peint”
provenance “Object:Mus´eesRoyauxdesBeaux-ArtsdeBelgique,Bruxelles”
provider “AthenaPlus”
dataprovider “KIK-IRPA,Brussels(Belgium)”
mediaURL http://balat.kikirpa.be/image/thumbnail/B117883.jpg
3.1 New ontology for obtaining the position of a CHO
As previously mentioned, an ontology is composed of different elements. Classes
provide an abstraction mechanism for grouping resources with similar charac-
teristics.Inthisparticularcase,twoOWLclassidentifiershavebeenpredefined,
namely the classes Thing and Nothing. The extension of Thing is the set of all5
individuals, whereas for Nothing it is the empty set. Consequently, every OWL
class is a subclass of Thing [8]. The individuals in the class extension are called
theinstancesoftheclass.Ifaclassisdefinedasasubclass,thesetofindividuals
that accepts should be a subset of those individuals in the parent class.
OWL distinguishes two main categories of properties to be defined in an
ontology:Objectproperties,whichlinkindividualstoindividuals;andDatatype
properties, which link individuals to data values.
Domainandrangeareaxiomsusedintheinferenceprocess.Botharedefined
as built-in properties. A domain axiom (marked as green arrows in Figure 1)
links a property to a class description and asserts that the subjects of such
property statements must belong to the class extension of the indicated class
description. A range axiom (black arrows in Figure 1) links a property to either
a class description or a data range. This axiom asserts that the values of this
property must belong to the class extension of the class description or to data
values in the specified data range.
The ontology of Figure 1 has been implemented. As shown, it delivers differ-
ent types of information.
Fig.1: Implemented ontology where domain and range axioms are marked as
green and black arrows respectively.
There are six general subclasses of Thing: Person, Object, Building, Floor,
Space and Position. Also, Creator is a subclass of Person, CHO is a subclass of
Object, and Room, Corridor and Stair are subclasses of Space.
Person referstoallkindsofindividuals,butCreator justreferstothecreators
mainlyretrievedfromEuropeana.Thedataproperty“Name”oftype<string >
acceptsvaluesas“VanderWeyden,Rogier”.TheclassPerson allowsextending6
thesystemwithothertypesofindividuals:producers,owners,peoplerepresented
in the CHO, etc.
Object refers to all kinds of objects that can be located inside a building: a
computer or a table in a room, a screen or TV, a painting on a wall, etc.
The extension of the class CHO is composed of particular objects with
an identifier to link with Europeana. The data property “Identifier” of type
<string >, which is an identifier in Europeana, accepts values as shown in Ta-
ble 1.
Building is the place related to the host institution. It has the data property
“Provenance” of type <string > that accepts values as “Mus´ees Royaux des
Beaux-Arts de Belgique, Bruxelles”.
Regarding spatial-related classes, the class Floor represents a floor of the
building where there are several spaces (class Space). These spaces are repre-
sented by the subclasses Room, Corridor, and Stair. Floor and Space have also
identifiers in order to know their particular names. For example, the room with
identifier “70 Weyden” (as shown later in Figure 3), is the one where the paint-
ing“D´eploration”isexhibited.Thisroomispartofthefloorlabelledas“Second
floor”.
Position is the class indicating the position (local or global) of an object. It
contains three data properties “X”, “Y”, “Z”, of type <double> that include
a relative local position with respect to a space, a floor or a building. The other
two data properties, “longitude” and “latitude”, of type <double>, are not
relativetoaspace,floororbuilding.Thesevaluesareusedforglobalpositioning
with Google APIs as will be explained later. Note that the system is flexible in
terms of establishing relationships between spaces, floors or buildings and this
can be modified according to particular cases.
Furthermore, it is worth mentioning several object properties, which link
individuals to other individuals. The object property “isRelativeTo” indicates
that an instance of the class Position is relative to an instance of the class
Building, Floor or Space. It is subsequently relative to the subclasses Room,
Corridor, and Stair. This property is used for local positioning, where the three
dataproperties“X”,“Y”,“Z”arerelativetoaparticularbuilding,floororspace.
The object property “isPartOf” indicates the place where spaces or floors
are located. For example, a room is part of a floor and also part of a building.
Simultaneously, a floor is part of a building.
The property “isSituatedIn” makes reference to the place where an object
is situated. For example, the painting “The Census at Bethlehem”, of Pieter
Bruegel the Elder, is an instance of the class CHO situated in the room with
identifier “68 Bruegel” and also situated in the floor with identifier “Second
floor”. Subsequently, it is situated in the building with the provenance “Royal
Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium”.
The property “isConnectedTo” is used to obtain the optimal path between
two spaces, as shown in the next sections. The rooms are connected to other
rooms,corridorsorstairs.AswillbeshowninSection3.5,A*algorithm[16]has
been used to find the shortest path between two rooms.7
Finally there are two object properties related to authors. The property “is-
CreatedBy” means that a CHO has been conceived by a creator. The CHO
previouslymentioned,whichrefersto“D´eploration”,waspaintedbythecreator
withthename“VanderWeyden”.Andtheproperty“isRepresentedIn”indicates
where author’s artworks are displayed.
3.2 Linking an IPS with the ontology
The presented ontology can be linked with two different classes of IPS: one of
them based on global positioning and another one oriented to local positioning.
The difference between them is whether the coordinates they return are global
to the Earth or relative to a certain building, floor or space (usually rooms).
The local positioning systems are more precise in indoor environments. For
this reason, it is better to use a global positioning system, like Google API, to
identify whether the user is in a building, i.e. Royal Museums of Fine Arts of
Belgium,PradoMuseumorLouvreMuseum.Then,thelocalIPS,as[12],isused
for indoor positioning delivering precise coordinates.
Considering this combination of IPS, the proposed system figures out which
is the nearest artwork with respect to the user, by filtering pieces situated at
less than 5 meters and ordering them by distance. This distance is implemented
by means of the Euclidean distance between the user position and the position
of the artwork. The system implements an SPARQL query, which makes use of
federated queries [23] to access to the remote SPARQL endpoint of Europeana.
The two mentioned types of IPS are explained in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.
3.3 Estimating position by means of Google and Android APIs
AndroidprovidesanAPIinandroid.location[1]deliveringthepositionofauser
accordingthreedifferentmethods:GPS,Cell-ID,andWi-Fi.Thesystemreturns
the position to a Location Listener object that invokes a method each time a
new Location object is received. The determination of the best location, ifthere
areseveralresultsfromthedifferentmethods,isdecidedbymeansofparameters
related to accuracy, speed, and battery-efficiency.
Google also provides a Location Services API [5]. According to the loca-
tion Android API [2], Google Location Services API provides a more powerful
andhigh-levelframework,whichautomaticallyhandleslocationproviders,user’s
movement, and location accuracy. It also provides a method to establish fences
surrounding a location and detection when the user is inside the area.
Finally, Google Maps Geolocation API [4] provides a web service by means
of HTTPS and using POST. This service receives a list of cell towers and a list
of WiFi routers, obtained by the client, with their respective signal strength.
The service returns the location with longitude and latitude and the accuracy.
The communications with the service are established using the JSON format.
The created ontology is flexible and able to assign a value of longitude and
latitude to a position instance. Note that all the previously described systems8
returntheuser’slocationusinglongitudeandlatitudevalues.Inordertocombine
GoogleAPIswiththepresentedontology,itisinitiallybettertoobtainthecloser
building to the user by means of Vincenty’s formulae [29], used in geodesy to
calculatethedistancebetweentwopointsonthesurfaceofaspheroid.Later,itis
possible to obtain the closest CHO by means of Haversine formula [21], method
to calculate the distance between two locations in a simple way. It has an error
because the radius of the sphere is not the same in all parts of the Earth. When
two locations are close, it is possible to use a medium radio of 6371 km with
minor error.
Somelibrarieslike[10]orembeddedJavascript[30]allowextendingSPARQL
functionalities.Theldodds:Distancefunctioncalculatesthedistancebetweentwo
geographic coordinates based on longitude and latitude.
3.4 Estimating position by means of depth maps and WiFi networks
A generalized version of the previous work [12] has been used for indoor posi-
tioning purposes. The proposed system is used for obtaining the identification
andtheuser’spositioninascenariocomposedofdifferentroomswherethereare
several people carrying smartphones. Two or more RGB-D sensors are situated
in each room for obtaining the coordinates of users by means of their skeletons.
The skeletons are obtained with the technique presented in [27] [6], where au-
thors propose new algorithms to quickly and accurately predict 3D positions of
bodies from depth images.
Users,orvisitorsinthecaseofmuseums,carrysmartphonesthatestablisha
connectiontosomeaccessiblenetwork.ThesesmartphonesobtainRSSIdataand
synchronously send them to a central web server. Simultaneously, this central
web server obtains body information from different RGB-D sensors.
Fig.2: Skeleton trajectories in a running example of the IPS developed. Twenty
RGB-D sensors are deployed in the scenario.9
Figure 2 illustrates this system. Several users can be seen with their corre-
spondingpathsatcertaintimestamps.ThissystemrequiresatleasttwoRGB-D
sensors in each room and all users need the application running. Eight WiFi ac-
cess points (i.e., routers) have to be accessible in the entire scenario to obtain
good WPS positioning.
The used SPARQL query obtains the nearest artwork with respect to the
user. It filters pieces situated in a range of 5 meters. The query makes use of
federated queries [23] to access to the remote SPARQL endpoint of Europeana
andmakesuseofAQRfunctions[25]tocalculateEuclideandistances.Notethat
a SPARQL Jena server [3] has been created to support the ontology.
3.5 Obtaining optimal path between two rooms
The presented ontology has been also prepared for obtaining the best path be-
tween two rooms. As can be seen in Figure 1, rooms are connected to other
rooms, corridors or stairs. A* algorithm [16] has been used to find the shortest
path between two rooms, which are considered as nodes in a graph. Users can
select a CHO in the catalogue and the system calculates the optimal path from
their current position.
Fig.3: Obtaining optimal path between two rooms
In Figure 3, an A* algorithm returns the optimal path to go from the room
“David”,whereJacques-LouisDavid’spainting“MaratAssassin´e”islocated,to
the room “70 Weyden”, where users can find Weyden’s painting “D´eploration”.
The rooms are subclasses of Space, and in Figure 3, the link between them
is the object property “isConnectedTo”, shown in the previous ontology.10
4 Experiments
Aiming to test the proposed ontology, an experiment has been designed and
carried out in the Royal Museum of Fine Arts of Belgium. This experiment
consisted of two stages, as detailed in the following.
First, a user walked around the museum, registering the location of each
painting linked to Europeana by means of an Android application which has
been developed for this purpose (see Figure 4a) and installed in smartphones.
The position of each masterpiece is delivered by the Google API and stored in
the database. Note that this process is only performed once, and it does not
need to be repeated at least paintings are relocated inside the museum. Four
paintings were chosen and their positions registered in the database.
Later, a different user navigated through the rooms, retrieving information
from Europeana with the mentioned application installed in his cellphone. The
4 studied paintings were visited 5 times each, delivering the application the
correct information every time the user was in a range of 5 meters. Figure 4b
shows an example where the system is detecting the masterpiece “The Census
at Bethlehem” by Pieter Bruegel.
(a) Android application (b) Detecting painting
Fig.4: Experiments developed using Google Location Services API.
5 Results and Conclusions
ThisarticlepresentsanewontologyforconnectingapreviouslydevelopedIndoor
Positioning System (IPS) and Europeana, the EU digital platform for cultural
heritage.Asshown,theproposedontologycanbeusedinamuseumforenhanc-
ing the user experience, by infering knowledge about cultural heritage objects.
The article also explains an option to obtain the optimal path between the
position of the user and a painting in the museum based on the A* algorithm.11
In order to test the developed ontology, some experiment has been carried
out, taking advantage of the Google Location API. Even though data from the
ontologywascorrectlyretrievedandthepositionofuserswasproperlyobtained
by means of data from cell towers and WiFi networks, the installation of more
WiFi access points could improve the positioning.
Future works include the testing of the mentioned IPS system (combining
RGB-D sensors and WPS), together with the solution presented in this paper,
in a museum environment.
Acknowledgments
This work has been developed with the help of the research projects DPI2013-
44776-R and DPI2016-77677-P of MICINN. It also belongs to the activities
carried out within the framework of the research network CAM RoboCity2030
S2013/MIT-2748 of Comunidad de Madrid.
References
1. Android Location API. Android Developers Application Programming Interface,
http://developer.android.com/reference/android/location/package-summary.html
2. AndroidLocationStrategies.AndroidDevelopersApplicationProgrammingInter-
face, http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/location/strategies.html
3. Apache Jena Server. Apache, http://jena.apache.org
4. GoogleMapsGeolocationAPI.GoogleMapsApplicationProgrammingInterface,
http://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/geolocation/intro
5. Google Play Services Location APIs. Google Play Services Application
Programming Interface, http://developer.android.com/training/location/retrieve-
current.html
6. Barmpoutis, A.: Tensor body: Real-time reconstruction of the human body and
avatar synthesisfrom rgb-d.Cybernetics, IEEETransactionson 43(5), 1347–1356
(2013)
7. Consortium,O.G.,etal.:Ogcgeosparql-ageographicquerylanguageforrdfdata.
OGC Candidate Implementation Standard 2 (2012)
8. Consortium, W.W.W., et al.: Owl 2 web ontology language document overview
(2012)
9. Deak,G.,Curran,K.,Condell,J.:Asurveyofactiveandpassiveindoorlocalisation
systems. Computer Communications 35(16), 1939–1954 (2012)
10. Dodds, L.: Sparql geo extensions (2006)
11. Dudas,P.M.,Ghafourian,M.,Karimi,H.A.:ONALIN:Ontologyandalgorithmfor
indoor routing. In: Mobile Data Management: Systems, Services and Middleware,
2009. MDM’09. Tenth International Conference on. pp. 720–725. IEEE (2009)
12. DuqueDomingo,J.,Cerrada,C.,Valero,E.,Cerrada,J.:Indoorpositioningsystem
using depth maps and wireless networks. Journal of Sensors 2016 (2016)
13. Duque-Domingo, J., Herrera, P.J., Valero, E., Cerrada, C.: Deciphering egyptian
hieroglyphs:Towardsanewstrategyfornavigationinmuseums.Sensors17(3),589
(2017)12
14. Gruber, T.R.: Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge
sharing.Internationaljournalofhuman-computerstudies43(5-6),907–928(1995)
15. Guber,T.:Atranslationalapproachtoportableontologies.KnowledgeAcquisition
5(2), 199–229 (1993)
16. Hart, P.E., Nilsson, N.J., Raphael, B.: A formal basis for the heuristic determina-
tionofminimumcostpaths.IEEEtransactionsonSystemsScienceandCybernet-
ics 4(2), 100–107 (1968)
17. Isaac,A.,Haslhofer,B.:Europeanalinkedopendata(data.europeana.eu).Seman-
tic Web 4(3), 291–297 (2013)
18. Lee,K.,Lee,J.,Kwan,M.P.:Location-basedserviceusingontology-basedsemantic
queries:Astudywithafocusonindooractivitiesinauniversitycontext.Comput-
ers, Environment and Urban Systems 62, 41–52 (2017)
19. Liu,W.,Chen,Y.,Xiong,Y.,Sun,L.,Zhu,H.:Optimizationofsamplingcellsize
for fingerprint positioning. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks
2014 (2014)
20. Matuszka, T., Gombos, G., Kiss, A.: A new approach for indoor navigation using
semantic webtechnologies and augmented reality. In: International Conference on
Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality. pp. 202–210. Springer (2013)
21. de Mendoza, J., et al.: Memoria sobre algunos m´etodos nuevos de calcular la lon-
gitud por las distancias lunares: y aplicacio´n de su teo´rica a la solucio´n de otros
problemas de navegacio´n. En la Imprenta real (1795)
22. Nakano, Y., Izutsu, K., Tajitsu, K., Kai, K., Tatsumi, T.: Kinect positioning sys-
tem (kps) and its potential applications. In: International Conference on Indoor
Positioning and Indoor Navigation. vol. 13, p. 15th (2012)
23. Prud’hommeaux, E., Buil-Aranda, C., et al.: SPARQL 1.1 federated query. W3C
Recommendation 21 (2013)
24. Saputra,M.R.U.,Widyawan,W.,Putra,G.D.,Santosa,P.I.:Indoorhumantrack-
ingapplicationusingmultipledepth-cameras.In:AdvancedComputerScienceand
Information Systems (ICACSIS), 2012 International Conference on. pp. 307–312.
IEEE (2012)
25. Seaborne,A.:ARQ-ASPARQLProcessorforJena.ObtainedthroughtheInternet:
http://jena. sourceforge. net/ARQ (2010)
26. Sevrin,L.,Noury,N.,Abouchi,N.,Jumel,F.,Massot,B.,Saraydaryan,J.:Charac-
terizationofamulti-userindoorpositioningsystembasedonlowcostdepthvision
(kinect)formonitoringhumanactivityinasmarthome.In:201537thAnnualIn-
ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC). pp. 5003–5007. IEEE (2015)
27. Shotton, J., Sharp, T., Kipman, A., Fitzgibbon, A., Finocchio, M., Blake, A.,
Cook,M.,Moore,R.:Real-timehumanposerecognitioninpartsfromsingledepth
images. Communications of the ACM 56(1), 116–124 (2013)
28. Tsetsos,V.,Anagnostopoulos,C.,Kikiras,P.,Hasiotis,P.,Hadjiefthymiades,S.:A
human-centeredsemanticnavigationsystemforindoorenvironments.In:Pervasive
Services, 2005. ICPS’05. Proceedings. International Conference on. pp. 146–155.
IEEE (2005)
29. Vincenty, T.: Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid with appli-
cation of nested equations. Survey review 23(176), 88–93 (1975)
30. Williams,G.:ExtensibleSPARQLFunctionswithEmbeddedJavascript.In:SFSW
(2007)