TheInternationalArchivesofthePhotogrammetry,RemoteSensingandSpatialInformationSciences,VolumeXL-4/W4,2013
ISPRSAcquisitionandModellingofIndoorandEnclosedEnvironments2013,11–13December2013,CapeTown,SouthAfrica
TO LOCALISE OR TO BE LOCALISED WITH WIFI IN THE HUBEI MUSEUM?
Edward Verbree a,, Sisi Zlatanova a,, Karl van Winden b, Eva van der Laan b, Antigoni Makri b,,
Li Taizhou c,, Ai Haojun c
a Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment
e.verbree@tudelft.nl; s.zlatanova@tudelft.nl
b Delft University of Technology, MSc Geomatics
c School of Computing, Wuhan University
ISPRS Working group IV/7
KEY WORDS: WiFi Fingerprinting, WiFi Monitoring, Indoor Localisation
ABSTRACT:
Indoor localisation is in demand for a variety of applications within the built environment. An overall solution based on a single
technology has not yet been determined. The aim of this paper is to gain insight on Signal Strength monitoring by a special kind of
WiFi Monitors in comparison to the commonly known fingerprinting method for the purpose of a 3D indoor navigation system.
Ttwo different WiFi based localisation techniques are tested during the MSc Geomatics DaRen Syntheses Project in the Hubei
Provincial Museum, China.
The first method detects the beacon frames send by smartphones, laptops and other WiFi enabled devices in range using Libelium
Meshlium Xtreme monitors. Their MAC addresses and the signal strength is measured by the Meshlium Xtreme and stored on an
external database. We call this method WiFi monitoring. The second method a Wifi enabled device, like a smartphone, measures the
signal strength of multiple Wifi Access Points in range to localise itself based on a previously created radio map. This method is
known as WiFi fingerprinting.
Both methods have some advantages and disadvantages. Advantages of the common way of WiFi fingerprinting are that the
implementation costs are relatively low, because it is usually possible to use (a part of) the existing WiFi AP infrastructure. WiFi
fingerprinting can reach a relatively high accuracy in the order of magnitude of meters. Finally, the location granularity can be
adjusted to what is necessary for the purpose of the indoor localisation. This makes it employable for a wide range of purposes.
The question remains how suitable these methods are for a 3D indoor navigation system for the Hubei provincial museum. One
important aspect is the localisation-granularity necessary for the application. In a museum it is not necessary to know the exact X,Y
position of a user (such high accuracy is unnecessary), more important is to know in which room the user is located so the
information on exhibitions can be presented and the starting point of the navigation can be determined.
Both methods can track the user and tell the room he or she is located at. Although WiFi smartphone monitoring may have a low
update frequency it is still suitable for a navigation system for a museum since visitors usually spend more than a couple of minutes
within a room.
1. INTRODUCTION from the museum point-of-view. The museum should be given
insight on the behaviour of people and the amount of people
The research was focused on two Wi-Fi based localization present in the museum.
methods, Wi-Fi monitoring and Wi-Fi fingerprinting using the
existing WLAN infrastructure. The first method detects the 2. WIFI MONITORING
beacon frames send out by mobile devices, laptops and other
Wi-Fi enabled devices in range using Libelium Meshlium The Meshlium Xtreme router launched by Libelium company is
Xtreme monitors - Wi-Fi monitors (Libelium, 2013) while in the Wi-Fi monitor that is used in the current project. Meshlium
the second one a mobile application receives signal strength Xtreme is a multiprotocol router for wireless sensor networks
measurements from multiple access points and compares them designed to connect ZigBee, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth sensors to the
with the values obtained in a previous (training) phase. The Internet through 3G connectivity. It allows the detection of any
main question that needs to be investigated is how suitable device working with Wi-Fi or Bluetooth interfaces, such as
these methods are for a context aware 3D indoor navigation iPhone and Android devices. In this research the device is going
system for the Hubei Provincial museum. The system demands to be used to detect mobile devices through their Wi-Fi
a few requirements of the localisation part. The most important connection. The information read from each user by the Wi-Fi
requirement is to provide the location of the user to the monitor contains:
application so that the right starting point in the navigation - The MAC address of the wireless interface, which allows
network to be assigned. A second requirement is to provide the identifying it uniquely.
room in which the user is located to be able to inform the user - The strength of the signal (in RSSI quality (0-100%) from
on the exhibits in that room. Moreover, the system has to be signal strength -90 dBm and -40 dBm)
able to provide the real time location of the user. Besides these - The vendor of the Mobile device (Apple, Nokia, etc)
user- and application- requirements, there is also a requirement
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-4-W4-31-2013 31TheInternationalArchivesofthePhotogrammetry,RemoteSensingandSpatialInformationSciences,VolumeXL-4/W4,2013
ISPRSAcquisitionandModellingofIndoorandEnclosedEnvironments2013,11–13December2013,CapeTown,SouthAfrica
- The Wi-Fi Access Point where the user is connected (if any).
Users not connected to an AP will be showed as "free users". 2.1 Implementation of the Wi-Fi Monitors
The recorded data can be stored in a local or an external
database. The Wi-Fi monitor is plugged into the power, which Being aware of the disadvantages of the Wi-Fi monitors, for
allows the administrator to read the data when connected to the determining the implementation of these devices the advantages
device. However, if the Wi-Fi monitor is connected to the are equally important. All mobile device types are detected
internet, the records can be sent to an external database. This which makes this method accessible for all users, including
makes it possible for the administrator to access the data from users of Apple devices. Also the possibility to store all the data
any place when provided with Internet connection (Libelium, externally on a database is a big advantage. In this way all the
2013). data can be reached from any location without the need for
information from the mobile device of the user. This last
During the testing phase the benefits and drawbacks of the Wi- advantage can be used for providing information to the
Fi monitors were revealed. The major issue with the Wi-Fi museum. It has been demonstrated the direction of the
monitors is that the interval between two successful scans of the movement of people can be computed and also the amount of
same mobile device is large (a couple of minutes). The scanning people can be calculated by using information provided by the
cycle of the Wi-Fi monitors is set at 5 seconds in most cases and Wi-Fi monitors. The museum managers can retrieve this
even 2 seconds at times, but still the interval between two scans information every moment of the day from their computer,
is between a minute and a couple of minutes. This is most likely without specific information from the user.
due to the active scanning of the mobile devices and the interval
between probe requests. Probe requests are the active scans by 3. FINGERPRINTING TECHNIQUE
the mobile device. "During active scan, the client tunes its IEEE
Fingerprinting is a commonly used indoor localization method
802.11 radio to the channel being scanned and broadcasts a
due to the high accuracy of location determination and low
probe request in order to listen to any available probe responses
costs of implementation as it is usually possible to use (a part
from APs on the specific channel with the matching SSID"
of) the existing infrastructure (Haojun et al., 2011). Another
(Sidiropoulos et al., 2012). A directed probe requests let the
advantage is that this technique can have a high location
client send a name-specific SSID request on which the specific
calculation frequency, also called location granularity. This
SSID will response. A broadcast probe with a null SSID will
means that the location calculation frequency can be adjusted to
cause all the APs to respond and these requests can be picked
what is necessary for the purpose of the indoor localization.
up by the Wi-Fi monitor. For a mobile device that is asleep, it
This makes it employable for a wide range of purposes.
sends out a probe request every minute. When the mobile
However, there are also some important disadvantages of Wi-Fi
device is in stand-by it sends out a request every 4-6 seconds.
fingerprinting. Firstly, implementation is extremely time
Only manual scanning for networks by the user can increase the
consuming since the offline phase takes a lot of time and effort
interval (Cisco, 2013). The interval between the probe requests
(Machaj and Brida, 2012). Secondly, fingerprinting does not
and the scanning cycle of the Wi-Fi monitors causes the Wi-Fi
work well in open spaces due to the lack of unique signal
monitors to miss some requests, which leads to larger intervals
strengths in such spaces (Lu et al., 2013). Thirdly, there are
than necessary. For localization purposes the current interval
many external circumstances that influence the accuracy of the
between two scans is too big, because within a minute a user
localization. For example, the presence of public or using
can already be moved from one room to the other. Also it is
different kind of mobile devices influences the measured signal
desirable for a localization system that all Wi-Fi monitors, in
strength and thus the accuracy of the measurements (Ma et al.,
our case two, to scan the user at the same time. This cannot be
2008). Finally, an important disadvantage of this technique is
guaranteed with our Wi-Fi monitors. A smaller interval between
that Apple devices are excluded from this localization method
consecutive probe requests would be a solution to scan the
because they are not able to carry out a Wi-Fi scan since all
mobile devices more often. According to Musa and Eriksson
such sniffer applications are banned (WlanBook, 2013).
(2012) a smaller interval can be achieved by "opportunistic AP
Fingerprinting is based on comparing the unique signal data
emulation". Besides the broadcast probes a mobile device sends
from a source send at a particular location with a radio map of
out frequently, it also frequently sends out directed probe
data (Fallah et al., 2012). Localization based on fingerprinting
requests for a specific SSID that it has been associated to in the
technique includes two phases, an offline phase and online
past. The idea is to change the SSID of the Wi-Fi monitor in a
phase. The offline or training phase is about collecting the data
SSID that the user has used in the past. In general this SSID can
for the radio map and in that way obtaining a unique signature
be well known providers that are in the memory of many mobile
of signal strengths of different access points at multiple
devices. When the mobile device tries to associate with the
locations at the research area. The online phase includes the
"known" SSID, it will encounter a different security protocol
comparison of the received signal strength values to the radio
than it has remembered for that SSID. Because it cannot
map and in that way give the approximate location of the user
connect to the AP with the unknown security protocol it will
(Rehim, 2004).
continuously sending out null packets to see if the AP is still
there. In that way the theory on how the Wi-Fi monitor will
receive additional probe requests is explained. In practise, the 3.1 Theory
performance was not improved.
In this research a Wi-Fi fingerprinting application created in the
Wuhan University was used. This application makes use of the
The second issue was that not all mobile devices were scanned
Parametric Signal Strength Distributions for location
by the Wi-Fi monitor. Especially newer devices tended to be
determination described by Rehim (2004). As it has already
invisible in the logs. At a certain time, one of these newer
been stated, the process consists of two phases, the offline and
devices did show up in a log of one Wi-Fi monitor but not on
online phase.
the other. Apparently, one of the Wi-Fi monitors had been
previously updated and the other was not. After updating the
Wi-Fi monitor, the newer mobile devices were scanned.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-4-W4-31-2013 32TheInternationalArchivesofthePhotogrammetry,RemoteSensingandSpatialInformationSciences,VolumeXL-4/W4,2013
ISPRSAcquisitionandModellingofIndoorandEnclosedEnvironments2013,11–13December2013,CapeTown,SouthAfrica
In the offline phase a radio map is created, signal strengths of people who are not using the application, but who only have
the present access points are measured and processed. It is their Wi-Fi enabled on their mobile device. On the other hand,
assumed that the signal strength is normally distributed. The the downside of storing data in the database related to privacy
location of the various access points is unknown, which reduces issues as users should give permission to let the application use
the problem to defining the parametric distribution fitting the their location for different purposes.
signal strength as if it would come from a single access point. 3. The interval between two consecutive scans with the Wi-Fi
The parametric distribution is defined by calculating the monitors is relatively big and a smaller interval is required for
probability density function (pdf) of the Gaussian distribution. localization. Visitors of the museums tend to walk slow and
therefore give the Wi-Fi monitors the opportunity to scan the
In the online phase the users measurement (signal strengths s) is users while they are still in the same place. However, this is not
compared to the previously created radio map and a location x a suitable for localization purposes.
with the highest probability P is selected and returned. To find 4. Besides the differences in method, there is also a difference
the highest probability of certain signal strengths at a certain in signal strength. A comparison has been made between the
location, once again the Gaussian distribution is used (Rehim, signal strengths measured by the Wi-Fi monitors and measured
2004). by the mobile device. Measurements are used from both devices
scanning
4. WI-FI MONITORED FINGERPRINTING. each other at the same time. A conversion for the signal strength
from the mobile device is necessary. The mobile device
“Fingerprinting techniques are especially appropriate for the measures in dBm, while the Wi-Fi monitor measures quality in
range of frequencies in which GSM and Wi-Fi networks operate percentage where the dBm is between -90 and -40.
(aprox. 850 MHz to 2.4 GHz) because of two main reasons: the
signal strength at those frequencies presents an important spatial 5. PRIVACY ISSUES
variability, and also a reliably consistency in time (despite the
variable nature of radio signals)" (Martin et al., 2010). The 3D indoor navigation system DaRen falls in the category of
Additionally, the authors state that the fingerprinting methods location-based services (LBS). LBS uses the user location to
already proved to be able to deliver better accuracies compared deliver a service. Privacy is a serious issue for LBS and it can
to propagation-based methods. An attempt has been made for have a great impact on the success of these services. An
localization with only two Wi-Fi monitors. The Wi-Fi monitors example of this, are the recycling bins of the company Renew
were already taken into account in the WLAN-infrastructure in (Datoo, 2013). This company installed recycling bins with
the fingerprinting method for the DaRen application. Therefore screens in the city of London that can show advertisements to
the data needed for fingerprinting is already present in the people that are close. In some of these bins Renew has installed
database of the Wi-Fi monitors. tracking devices to detect and track mobile devices, so that the
advertisements to be personalised for each mobile device. The
Similar as with normal fingerprinting an offline phase is needed problem with this system was that MAC-addresses are tracked
to create the radio map. All the reference points are already without the consent of the user and therefore the tracking
measured for the actual fingerprinting method of the DaRen system in the bins was not allowed by the city of London.
application, however a radio map has to be created. The RSSI
measured by both Wi-Fi monitors for every reference point is Besides the legal concerns, there are also the user's concerns
required to create a radio map of this method. The exact time of about their privacy, such as who receives this location
every measured reference point is known, which is at least 4 information, for which purpose and for how long is it used and
minutes, including the MAC-address of the mobile device that stored (Xu et al., 2009). For DaRen project, it is important to
was used for measurement. A query in the database can filter investigate both legal and user concerns so that users' privacy to
the data, so that the different RSSI values remain for the given be protected. So, that then these concerns can be taken care off
reference point and Wi-Fi monitor. The averages of these values in the system, if they apply. In this section, first privacy is
are taken into account. This has been done for every reference discussed where both user concerns and legal concerns are
point for both monitors until a table is created with X, Y and addressed. After that, it is investigates whether these concerns
RSSI thus creating the radio map. are applicable for the DaRen project and if these concerns are
applicable how these concerns should be taken care off.
4.1 Comparison.
5.1 Privacy
There are some advantages and disadvantages of the method as
compared to the original fingerprinting which are discussed Often, privacy is described as the right to be left alone (Warren
below: and Brandeis, 1890). This right is also been recognized by the
1. The advantage of Wi-Fi monitoring fingerprinting stems from United Nations as a fundamental right in The UN Universal
the fact that no additional application is required to scan the Declaration of Human Rights (Loenen and de Jong, 2007).
APs and derive the RSSI. On the other hand, Wi-Fi monitors There are different kinds of privacy. In this case information
are more expensive than the regular APs used for original privacy, in which information is regarded as personal data, is on
fingerprinting. interest. Personal data is regulated by the privacy laws of each
2. Additional advantage is that all the data is stored directly in country.
the database. The data is accessible every moment of the day
and in thus can provide real-time information to the museum. 5.2 User concerns
Adding additional Wi-Fi monitors will enrich the information
provided thus improving the quality. Furthermore, when the Lot of research concerning the privacy concerns of users using a
data is stored in the database, it is possible to provide LBS has been conducted. Those studies reveal that users are
information to the user about the location of other people thus concerned about loss of privacy when using LBS (Xu et al.,
enabling him to avoid crowded exhibits. This also includes 2009). The different concerns can be categorized in four groups:
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-4-W4-31-2013 33TheInternationalArchivesofthePhotogrammetry,RemoteSensingandSpatialInformationSciences,VolumeXL-4/W4,2013
ISPRSAcquisitionandModellingofIndoorandEnclosedEnvironments2013,11–13December2013,CapeTown,SouthAfrica
collection, unauthorized secondary use, errors and improper the information source. That means that if the person does not
access. Collection reflects the concern about the extensive explicitly express his or her dissent on being tracked, then his or
amount of personally identifiable data collected and stored in her location can be recorded and used.
databases. Secondly, unauthorized secondary use is about the
concern that information is collected from individuals for one 5.4 Privacy concerns DaRen
purpose but is used for another secondary use without consent.
Errors reflect the concern that protection against deliberate and The first step is to identify the occurrence of personal
accidental errors in personal data is inadequate. Improper access information in the DaRen system in order to find out if data
is the concern that data about individuals are readily available protection regulation has to be applied on the system. Since the
to people not properly authorized view or work with data. The main difference in the privacy regulation of the Netherlands and
abovementioned concerns should be considered in the design China is that the in the Netherlands the implementation is
and implementation of the application. Especially the proper regulated by law while the substance is more-or-less the same,
communication of privacy issues related to the application the Dutch privacy regulation is used to detect the occurrence of
should be of primary importance. Users should be aware that personal information. As it has already mentioned, according to
their privacy is protected. the Dutch law information is personal when it can identify or
has a possibility to identify a specific person. Normally in LBS
5.3 Legal Concerns during the localization or tracking of a mobile device, personal
information is collected as the MAC address of the device is
In many countries the privacy concerns are addressed by scanned. In DaRen project the user does not have to provide
applying regulation. This means that regulations can differ per any personal information while using the mobile phone
country. Therefore, in this subsection the current legislation application. However, the localization component includes two
current legislation regarding protection of privacy in the sub-systems. The subsystem that provide the museum visitors'
Netherlands and China are investigated. location in the application does not make use of the MAC
address but the sub-system that provides the information to the
5.3.1 Netherlands. museum managers makes use of it and therefore the data falls
under the data protection regulation. In case that the two
According to the Dutch law information is personal when it can subsystems will be integrated into one, the implementation of
identify or has a possibility to identify a specific person. If privacy terms and conditions would be indisputable. The
information is personal, regulations should be applied on this application should ask for the user's permission before being
information as described in the "Wet Bescherming installed on the device and the purpose of collecting the MAC
Persoonsgegevens" (WBP, 2011). According to this law the address of the device should be clearly stated. Moreover,
user should give prior consent in order for his personal personal data should be sufficiently protected from
information to be used. Furthermore, it should be stated which unauthorized use.
information is used and for what purpose. Also, it s not allowed
this information to be later used for other purposes or to be sold 6. CONCLUSIONS
to a third party without consent. Finally, personal information is
only stored till the point that information does not serve its This paper gave insight on WiFi smartphone monitoring with
purpose anymore and the stored information should be respect to the WiFi fingerprinting method for the purpose of a
sufficient protected to prevent people from gaining 3D indoor navigation system. The advantages and
unauthorized access. Further, this year the Article 29-working disadvantages of both systems were listed and a conclusion is
group (Article 29 Working Party, 2013) which are the privacy made based on the arguments given in this paper and the real-
supervisors for the European Union gave their opinion on the life problems that were encountered during the creation of a 3D
area of privacy and mobile applications/LBS. They provide indoor navigation application for the Hubei Provincial Museum.
mobile application developers with some obligations and
recommendations. Most of the obligations are more-or-less ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
implemented in the Dutch Law. On the other hand, the
This paper is based on the work conducted by the students of
recommendations such as informing the public when there is a
the MSc Geomatics Delft University of Technology (the
data leak and use in the privacy condition information special
Netherlands) during their Syntheses Project 2013 in cooperation
for European users, are more interesting.
with LIESMARS Wuhan University (China). The project
focussed on demonstrating the potential of 3D indoor
5.3.2 China.
navigation systems and raising awareness of the possibilities
provided by the technology for every-day users. DaRen, the
In China there is currently no specific legislation for protecting
final product of the project is a 3D indoor navigation system for
personal information. Only a guide of personal information
Hubei Provincial Museum (China). The synthesis project took
protection was published in November 2012 (Shi, 2012), which
seven weeks and was subdivided into three development
became a national standard since February 2013 (Zhang, 2013).
phases: preparation, implementation and synthesis. The full
This guide divides the personal information into personal
report with test results is to be accessed from:
general information and personal sensitive information. The
www.geomatics.tudelft.nl.
personal sensitive information is the information that can lead
to harmful effect on the person when it is revealed or changed,
REFERENCES
such as the ID number, phone number and fingerprint. The
personal general information is all other personal information
Cisco, 2013. White Paper: Presence Analytics [pdf] Cisco
excluding sensitive information. According to this definition,
Meraki.
the writer thinks the anonymous personal location information
https://meraki.cisco.com/lib/pdf/meraki_whitepaper_presence.p
belongs to the personal general information, which is allowed to
df [Accessed 25 October 2013].
be collected and processed under tacit or expressed consent of
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-4-W4-31-2013 34TheInternationalArchivesofthePhotogrammetry,RemoteSensingandSpatialInformationSciences,VolumeXL-4/W4,2013
ISPRSAcquisitionandModellingofIndoorandEnclosedEnvironments2013,11–13December2013,CapeTown,SouthAfrica
Fallah, N., Apostolopoulos, I., Bekris, K., and Folmer, E., 2013. http://qz.com/112873/this-recycling-bin-is-following-you/
Indoor Human Navigation Systems: A Survey. Interacting with
Computers, 25.1: 21-33. WBP. (2011), Wet Bescherming Persoongegevens.
http://www.cbpweb.nl/Pages/pb_20111115_google.aspx
Haojun, A., Taizhou, L., Jianjian, W., Menglei , Z., 2013. A
New Wi-Fi Fingerprint Indoor Localization Method for Smart WlanBook (2013)
Phone’s Heterogeneity. School of Computer Science, Wuhan http://wlanbook.com/why-did-apple-ban-iphone-ipad-wifi-
University. scanning-apps/
Libelium, 2013. Meshlium Technical Guide v4.0 [pdf]
Libelium. Available at:
http://www.libelium.com/development/Meshlium/documentatio
n/Meshlium-technical-guide/ [Accessed 25 October 2013].
Lu, B., Niu, J., Juny, J., Cheng, L., Guy Y., 2013. WiFi
Fingerprint Localization in Open Space. State Key Laboratory
of Software Development Environment, Beihang University,
Beijing 100191, China and Singapore University of Technology
and Design, Singapore
Ma, J., Li, X., Tao, X., and LU, J., 2008. Cluster Filtered KNN:
A WLAN-Based Indoor Positioning Scheme. State Key
Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Machaj, J., Brida, P., 2012. Impact of Radio Fingerprints
Processing on Localization Accuracy of Fingerprinting
Algorithms. Electronics and electrical engineering. No7 vol .
123
Musa, A.B.M., Eriksson, J., 2012. Tracking Unmodified
Smartphones Using Wi-Fi Monitors.
Rehim, M.A.A.A.Y.A., 2004. Horus: A WLAN-Based Indoor
Location Determination System.
Shi, J., 2012. The personal information protection legislation
under Web environment. Available at:
http://d.g.wanfangdata.com.cn/Periodical_szdxxb-
zxshkxb201206013.aspx
Sidiropoulos, N., Mioduszewski, M., Oljasz, P., Schaap, E.,
2012. Open Wifi SSID Broadcastvulnerability.
Van Loenen, B., de Jong, J., 2007. ‘SDIs and Privacy:
Conflicting Interests of the Spatially Enabled Society', Chapter
21, In A. Rajabifard (ed.), Towards a Spatially Enabled Society,
ISBN 978-0-7325-1620-8, University of Melbourne, pp. 271-
284
Warren, S. D., & Brandeis, L. D., 1890. The right to privacy.
Harvard law review,4(5), 193-220.
Xu, H., Gupta, S., & Shi, P., 2009. Balancing User Privacy
Concerns in the Adoption of Location-Based Services: An
Empirical Analysis across Pull-Based and Push-Based
Applications. iConference (iSociety: Research, Education, and
Engagement, University of NorthCarolina-Chapel Hill.
Zhang, Y., Chen, X., Jiang, J., 2010. Wayfinding-Oriented
Design for Passenger Guidance Signs in Large-Scale Transit
Center in China. Transportation Research Record: Journal of
the Transportation Research Board, No. 2144, Transportation
Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
2010, pp. 150–160.
Websites:
Datoo, S. (2013), This recycling bin is following you.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-4-W4-31-2013 35