See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/224439926
Application of indoor navigation technologies under practical conditions
Conference Paper · April 2009
DOI: 10.1109/WPNC.2009.4907837 · Source: IEEE Xplore
CITATIONS READS
5 358
3 authors, including:
Ralf Kruse Birgit Wendholt
EnableChange GmbH Hochschule für Angewandte Wissenschaften Hamburg
2 PUBLICATIONS 5 CITATIONS 11 PUBLICATIONS 7 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Birgit Wendholt on 03 June 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.Application of Indoor Navigation Technologies
Under Practical Conditions
Bjo¨rn Jensen Ralf Kruse Birgit Wendholt
Department Computer Science Department Computer Science Department Computer Science
Faculty Technique and Computer Science Faculty Technique and Computer Science Faculty Technique and Computer Science
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences Hamburg University of Applied Sciences Hamburg University of Applied Sciences
Hamburg, Germany Hamburg, Germany Hamburg, Germany
Email: bjoern.jensen@haw-hamburg.de Email: ralf.kruse@haw-hamburg.de Email: wendholt@informatik.haw-hamburg.de
Abstract—The project outline in this paper concentrates on structure and function. In all cases people staying in such
preparingtheinfrastructureforindoorspatialapplicationswhile areas at least need spatial orientation.
simultaneously sketching useful applications in the domain.
Nowadaysmultifunctionalbuildingsnotonlychallengethespatial
Theprojectoutlineinthispaperthusconcentratesonprepar-
but moreover the individual thematic orientation because of
the diversity of service offers. “Life in urban spaces” requires ing the infrastructure for spatial applications while simul-
navigation aids not only to be available all over the city but also taneously sketching meaningful applications in the domain.
in the neighbourhood including the inside of single buildings. We start with a brief overview of related work and base
Two example scenarios will introduce those kinds of naviga-
technologies. Two example scenarios will introduce those
tion applications we are currently working on. First, a typical
kindsofnavigationapplications,wearecurrentlyworkingon.
navigation task, the second a navigation task that combines
with proximity services. To minimize risks we have chosen an One, a typical navigation tasks, the second a navigation tasks
iterative approach where, in follow up stages, requirements that combines with proximity services. To minimize risks we
will increase in complexity. To minimize cost we decided on a have chosen an iterative approach, where in follow up stages
simulation approach, based on game and physics engines for
requirements will increase in complexity. To minimize cost
realistic simulations. Given this approach we give an insight to
we decided on a simulation approach, based on game and
our current working results ending with those projects already
finished. The conclusion will revise our results so far and gives physics engines for realistic simulations. Given this approach
an outlook to future work. we give an insight to our current working results ending with
those projects already finished. The conclusion will revise our
I. INTRODUCTION
results so far and gives an outlook to future work.
This paper continues on the ideas and concepts already
elaboratedinthephdthesisin[1].Settingupaninfrastructure II. RELATEDWORK
for indoor navigation yields the prerequesites that brings trip
A. Pedestrian Navigation and Proximity Services
planning scenarios from outdoors to complex buildings, e.g.
airports, universities, exhibition or conference halls. It also During the last decade numerous solutions for pedestrian
continuesontheworkoftheUbiComplab[2]attheHamburg navigation systems have been proposed. Most of them deal
University of Applied Sciences (aka HAW), especially the with outdoor navigation based on GPS (see e.g. [3]). Hence
discussion in the Living Place Hamburg project funded by with the improvement of indoor-positioning techniques we
the agency for economy and business of Hamburg, which observe an increase in indoor-navigation solutions sometimes
is concerned with applications to improve “life in urban combined with outdoor counterparts to form a hybrid
spaces”. This requires navigation aids not only to be avaible navigation system.
all over the city but also in the neighbourhood including the
inside of single buildings. All of the indoor variants are concerned with guidance of
people through more or less complex buildings. They differ
Nowadays multifunctional buildings not only challenge in choice of position techniques, quality of presentation and
the spatial but moreover the individual thematic orientation user interaction and their very aim of navigating people.
because of the diversity of service offers. In a conferencing
scenario, for example, people need orientation for interesting CyberGuide [4] besides ParcTab [5], one of the first
workshops and talks. Universities may serve as conference representative in this field, is a hybrid navigation system that
sites and thus demand the same aid for visitors like uses infrared beacons indoor and GPS outdoor to detect a
pure conference centers. In exhibition halls guidance for a person’s location and visualize it on a map. Certain locations
personalizedexhibitiontourisrequired.Whetherthedifficulty on maps are annotated with additional information.
is more of spatial or thematic nature depends on buildingIRREAL[6]theindoorpartofthehybridsystemREAL[7] B. Automated Extraction and Generation of the Building and
uses infrared-sensors for locating people. The project focuses the Route Model
on multi-modal route descriptions that are optimized with
respect to the resources of different devices - especially their Most of the systems mentioned so far use hand-crafted
interaction capabilities - like PDAs or notebooks exploiting maps for the underlying building infrastructure. The more
domain knowledge and a user model. complexbuildingsarethemoreessentialtheneedtoautomatic
extraction of maps out of existing CAD data. Hence, as has
beenpointedoutby[16],CADdataistoodetailedastoserve
RENA [8] a hybrid indoor and outdoor navigation systems
asasuitablespatialmodelfornavigationplanning.Moreover:
emphasise like REAL on resource adaptive multi-modal
”An improved connectivity, and thus a more elaborate
navigation support seamlessly switching between various
topological model, is essential for the implementation of
kinds of positioning and data transmission techniques. Indoor
route guidance and map matching algorithms.” [16]. [17],
positioningisbasedonWLAN.RENAintegratesapedestrian
[18] introduces GEOEXTRACT to reduce and classify spatial
and car navigation with situation aware services like weather
data when transforming into an open standard. Objects are
forecasts and traffic reports.
classified as door, room, corridor, building, etc. The spatial
entities are defined by location, shape and their topological
relations.
Open-SPIRIT[9]isahybridindoorandoutdoornavigation
system designed to guide public transport travellers. A
[19] develops an algorithm for automatic graph extraction
personalguideproposesindividualintermodalandnationwide
fromtopologicallystructureddata.[20]proposesanalgorithm
interconnections including guidance through public transport
to derive topological relations between objects based on a
stations.Open-SPIRITusesbluetoothasacell-basedapproach
structural component graph of room faces and a room graph
for indoor positioning.
to apply them in an building energy simulation tool. [21]
presents a tool that can be used to automatically extract a
SaiMotion [10], [11] a pure indoor navigation system route graph from the given CAD model without reduction
based on DECT for positioning focuses on task management and classification of spatial entities. [22] develops a spatial
assistance. SaiMotion uses a rich context model including query language for extracting partial models that fulfill
location, user, tasks and activity information to help a user certain spatial constraints, e.g. directional operators such as
accomplish a scheduled spatially and temporally distributed ”‘northOf”’ or ”‘above”’. They introduce a space-partitioning
task. In case of impending failure the system corrects an data structure called slot-tree, that enables choice between
ongoing schedule. Route guidance is implemented as hints computational effort and accuracy. [23] introduces a 3D
for rooms derived from a schedule without explicit route navigable data model to support emergency reponse in
descriptions. buildings. The model is based on a 3D geometric data model
andrepresentspedestrianaccesswithinbuildingsasanetwork
of walkway sections and connections. This model serves as
As opposed to navigation services that use location to input to an indoor navigation system that identifies optimal
guide people through areas, proximity services offer relevant routes within a multilevel building and provides navigation
information to users suitable for her contexts exploiting the guidance for rescue personnel.
spatial proximity of users to objects of interest. As a kind
of contextual bookmarking [12] individual stages of a route
[24] proposes a model for automatic extracting geometry
are annotated with contextual information whereas route
and topology of a building. Based on transformations a
finding is left as task to the users. Typical representatives
distance matrix is computed, that contains distances among
in this area are museum guides like MOBIS [13]. Users are
all entities, which serves as input for well-known path-finding
provided exhibit related information when they reach the near algorithms1.
surrounding of an exhibit equipped with infrared beacons in
order to detect a person. A similar approach can be found in
A brief sketch of algotithms and models yields possible
HIPS [14] and PEACH [15].
solutions for the automated extraction task. Ongoing work
will show if and how these proposal are applicable to our
In our project we are investigating the integration of domain under consideration.
navigational and proximity services in order to define useful
location based services for indoor environments. Therefor we
need a well founded base for critical essential technologies
and models, like the underlying spatial and route model and
1Sincesuchanapproachyieldsexponentialdistancematrixesinanumber
the positioning technique at hand.
ofspatialentities,anodeandpathreductionprocedureshouldbeappliedto
comeupwithafeasiblesizeforaroutegraph([1]).C. Indoorpositioning building partially. Bob is inside the building. He is on the
A number of well-known indoor positioning techniques movesohehasnofixedposition.InthatmomentAliceenters
have been evolved over the last two decades. the building Bob is informed by the information system about
it (via mobile or something similar). Bob enables Alice to
Most of these technologies use a sensor infrastructure with see its position. Alice gets raw information to orient herself
quantitative measures based on infrared, ultrasound or radio andasymbolforanonymisedguidancetoBob.Aliceusesthe
waves either as beacon infrastructure or cell based, some of given information to get through the floor Bob is in. When
them combine different wireless techniques. For a survey on Alice gets closer to a public display a schematic 2D-map of
well-known techniques we refer the reader to [25]. Recently, the floor is visible. In the map Bob’s location is highlighted
RFID [26] gains the focus of research in indoor positioning. so Alice could see how to get to him.
On the other hand we observe qualitative approaches like
B. Conference-Guidance-System
visual tag detection or the on proposed in [27] who uses
This scenario is based on a bigger and more complex
landmarksandanglesectorstoderivethepositionofaperson.
building which is completely unknown to external visitors.
To avoid a complex and expensive infrastructure of There is one fact in common of most conferences. Every
transmitters and receivers when using sensor based indoor visitor gets a document with events and respective locations
positioning, you either choose an infrastructure-less inertial at her/his hand. In this example the navigation should be
systems using gyroscopes, digital compasses, accelaration an improved routing system that leads the visitor to those
sensors or step counters or rely on an existing infrastructure. locationswheretheselectedeventstakeplace.Tofulfilthetask
Inertial systems extrapolate the actual position over time thesystemneedsacompleteinformationsetaboutthebuilding
with the major drawback of fault accumulation2. A further whichisneededtocalculatearouteandtonavigateinsidethe
argument againts these techniques is the additional equipment building. This should be an improvement of the given system
that becomes necessary for mobile users. Thus the use of and it should handle the support of groups and individuals as
existing infrastructure and equipment available to a mobile well.Navigationandinformationcouldbesupportedbyusing
user will be the most promising approach for developing the environment and local equipment on one hand. On the
everyday navigation applications. WLAN (e.g. [29]) based other hand it could be better to extend the system by using
indoor-positioning and Bluetooth (e.g. [30]) based position mobile devices.
detection are examples for using existing infrastructure or
IV. APPROACH
equipment.
The given scenarios are complex and multifaceted. Our
As it comes to applications built on top of positioning very aim is the realization of the given scenarios. So we start
techniques, we typically find combinations of different sensor with a systematic analysis of existing technologies.
techniques. Examples are projects like NIMBUS ([31]) and
NAVIO [30]. NAVIO primarily use a WLAN infrastructure The first step is to evaluate what kind of basic technology
for positioning and combine with other wireless techniques is needed for positioning. At the Hamburg University of
such as RFID Bluetooth or ZigBee. Applied Sciences a lot of work has been done on context
of navigation. But WLAN has never been used for position
As for the former, our project is concerned with location tracking. So we try to use the outcome and the lessons
aware and navigational servives. Because of availability, we learned of past projects. And we want to integrate research
will rely on WLAN in most szenarios, although consider findings as much as possible. Sometimes we have to extend
alternatives whenever possible. therelyingwork.Sometimeswehavetoredosomething.This
wouldbetransferredtogivenproblems.Wealsoimplemented
III. SCENARIOS
the automatic generation of the needed maps. The necessary
Two different scenarios are examined. The first one is of information is extracted from given CAD models.
low complexity in which general functionality of Indoor-
Navigation and -Positioning should be shown. The second is The usability lab of the Hamburg University of Applied
more complex. It handles a very popular use case. Both are Sciences is used to ensure that each concept is proven in
real experiments in which single techniques and technologies all stages of the project. Sometimes a realisation could be
are consolidated. too complex, expensive and time-consuming. In front of this
case the solutions and approaches will be simulated. We are
usingthegeneratedmaptogettomapsforopensourcegame-
A. Meet up inside a building
engines.Togetausablesimulatedmaporbuildinganykindof
Two persons - Bob and Alice - arrange a meeting inside
information (2D and height) is transformed into a data format
a building (via public subscriber). Both of them know the
thatcouldbeusedbya3D-GameEngine(incl.physicsengine).
To get a more authentic model any kind of outside influences
2Forsomecircumstancesitcouldbeshown,thatcorrectingfaultsbyrandom
GPSmeasuresreducesthefaultrateto2%([28]). likeotherpeople(BOTS),noise,lightetc.hastobeintegratedintoourvirtualenvironment.Thisisafarcheaperwaytoprove category groups introduced in section II as there are:
an approach than using real persons.
V. PROJECTOUTLINE • Indoorpositioning
The experiments are based on the usage of WLAN- • Automated Extraction of Geometry and Topology of
Buildings
HotSpots because this is a widespread technology available
for common use. • Pedestrian Navigation and Proximity Services
The first results are followed by currently related projects,
Currently two different Indoor-Positioning-Engines are in which are projects with aspects of indoor navigation and
evaluation.Bothofthempromiseanexactnesse<=1m.The indoor positioning.
aim is to observe the performance under changing conditions.
A. Indoorpositioning
The application range differs in environmental circumstances
(“hotspot-concentration”, areal structure and so on). The first Navigation of individuals are based on the localisation of
environment is composed of two adjacent floors and a low the users. The following approaches are implemented, applied
complex areal structure within the Hamburg University of and/or evaluated as preparation to build an indoor navigation
Applied Sciences. This environment supports us in a first system:
evaluation of the used systems in front of localisation quality.
We will be able to detect basic kinds of interference factors 1) IMAP: The indoor distance measurement and
that can be considered in transferring the technique to a more positioning system, shortly IMAP, is an outcome of the
complex building. The floors are located on two different bachelor thesis [32] adduced in the UbiComp-Project at the
levels so the very outcome of the testing technologies should HAW. IMAP uses ultrasound and IEEE 802.15.4 for the
be if and how a chosen infrastructure handles the switch position determination by time difference of arrival. This
between levels. The low-complex environment leads to a solution has a high-accuracy in determination of position by
common imagination of what is necessary to implement some a beacon, but with a high afford of installation. An IMAP
kind of navigation and routing. Further on we are evaluating installation with 22 transmitter beacons placed in a raster
and developing algorithms to extract map data out of given with a distance of two meters between each other and was
CAD-Data automatically. We prove this output because this used in navigation applications and for an automatic indoor
isthebasicinformationforourpositioningandroutingsystem. flight control system for a model aircraft.
Our preliminary findings should be transferred to a more 2) Ultra-wideband: In the context of the “LivingPlace
complex building of the Hamburg University of Applied Hamburg” project a professional localisation system based
Sciences in middle term. This building is more plain than on UWB is currently evaluated with respect to high position
the first one but it has a large footprint. There are less small accuracy. We consider USB as an alternative to WLAN-
corridors in it but more rooms which connect to other rooms. based positioning in controlled non-public environments. A
Theyarewide-rangedwithmanycolumnsinit.Levelsarenot professional localisation system is in use to gather experience
strictly divided from each other because there are sublevels in in development of location based services. This system
between. Those facts lead to some kind of complexity most from the company Ubisense is based in Ultra-wideband (aka
users are not able to handle. All the rooms and areas include UWB). A accuracy for determination of position can be
some kind of information but not as explicit as it should be reached well below one meter. The experience in location-
so it could be used as landmark or something similar for based application development is gathered in the project
newbies. The named problems could be observed by taking “Living Place” and other projects.
alookatundergraduatestudentsinthefirsttermsatthefaculty.
3) WiFi: WiFi based positioning is less precise then
Our aim is to establish some kind of navigation concept
technologies introduced so far. The wide distribution of
that resolves the problems addressed so far. And our findings
mobile devices opens the opportunity to use out of the shelf
shouldbetransformedintotheimplementationofaconference
technologies for the determination of positioning. This reduce
system within a huge semi-public building.
expenditure of deployment and installation, which making
WiFi-based solutions more and more interesting for indoor
Besidequestionsincontextoftechnologyquestionsincon-
localisation. Therefore we evaluate two WiFi-based solutions,
text of technique and implementation will be resolved too. In
one commercial, one open source, with respect to their
this case you should know how landmarks should be realized,
applicability for our in indoor navigation scenarios:
howtheyareimplementedintheconcreteenvironmentandso
on.
1) Ekahau is a company that build a commercial solution
VI. CURRENTWORKANDFIRSTRESULTS for real-time location tracking. It offers a software for
The project outcomes are intermediate steps for solutions location tracking, the Ekahsu RTLS, and Ekahau Site
of indoor navigation. The shown results are orientated on Survey for planning and administrating of WiFi layoutsforsuchasolution.Especially,thefaithofplanningwith
Ekahau is in the focus of evaluation.
2) MagicMap is a localisation system developed at the
Humboldt University. It is an open source solution
and designed for extensibility, i. e. the positioning can
transparency changed from WiFi to other wireless tech-
nologies.
Thefocusoftheevaluationwithrespecttotheenvironment
laysontheaccuracyoflocalisationandtheeffortofdeploying.
The effort to install such a system consists mainly of the
necessary density of access points for regarded -accuracy, of
measurement of the WiFi Access Points and work expended
for calibration.
B. Automated Extraction of Geometry and Topology of Build-
ings
Fig.1. Amobileprototyptoevaluatelandmark-basednavigation
The indoor navigation is based in edificial-information of
theoperationalarea.TheinformationiscontainedinCAD-files
and building information systems. This information should be individual guidance. In such an environment every sign
reduced to needed data for indoor navigation and transformed has to be meaningful to every person. Individual guidance
in a format further use. Derivate information for navigation means every person needs to carry a personal navigation
shouldbeadditionallystoredandnavigationapplicationshave device. A solution that make this personal device obsolete
access to base and derivated information. CityGML is a com- is a navigation system that adapts to group profiles and
moninformationmodelbasedonXML,whichisstandardized distributes navigational hints to public displays. An users
by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) and ISO TC211. strategy to solve the concurrent group access to publicity
ThisFormatcanbeusedforinformationoutoftheCAD-Files shared resources. Numerous usability tests proofed the
andderivedinformations,likecalculatedroutesfornavigation. chosen approach to be feasible. The usability tests shows
This format can accessed programmatic (for example with that dynamic signposting can have benefits for navigation.
citygml4j) and their are several tools based on this format. The shown signs can be adapted to a actual situation and the
As first intermediate step we generates a PostGIS-Database shown signs can be concentration on necessary signs.
withdxf2postgisoutoftheCAD-Filesforabuildingfromthe
university, which makes further transformation easier. The limitation of and reduction of signpost is central for
success of such systems. Because of the effort to build such
C. Evaluating alternative Forms of Pedestrian Navigation
a installation, the investigation is done by a simulation with
Newwaysandclassicalwaysofnavigationareevaluatedto a game-engine3 described in section IV. Figure 2 views a
improve the guidance of the user and to make the navigation screenshot of this simulation, with on dynamic signposting.
more intuitive with less infrastructure.
1) Landmarks in pedestrian navigation: The master thesis
D. Pedestrian Navigation and Proximity Services
[33] reviewed the use of landmarks in the navigation. A
prototypeofamobileapplicationbasedonandroidwasbuild. Different prototypes that use different approaches was
Figure 1 shows this Android-based mobile application with implemented. In section VI-C are shown prototypes of
a map and artificial landmarks. The benefit of landmarks navigation, but the both projects are focused on evaluating
in a mobile pedestrian navigation is analysed by usability new orientation approaches with this prototypes. The
tests with the prototype. The test show that landmark can following navigation systems are case-based studies to
be a benefit for pedestrian navigation. The extraction of evaluate the use of the technology.
natural landmarks is complex and wasn’t part of the thesis,
but artificial landmarks can placed easily. The prototype 1) Airport Terminal Navigation: A project from master
and evaluation shows the support of guidance by artificial students build a prototype for indoor navigation based on
landmarks, which makes pedestrian navigation more intuitive. IMAPS indoor positioning system. The project is describes in
the Reports [35], [36], [37] and [38]. It shows that effort of
2) Dynamic signposting in group navigation: The master installation is to high, because height density of sensor-nodes
thesis [34] examines the use of dynamic signposting in are needed.
group navigation in a complex environment. The scenario
proposed in this work, was group navigation in an airport
context. Static signposting for navigation has his limits in 3ThesesimulutionsaremadewithIrrlichtanopensourcegame-engine.indoor positioning.
5) Hybrid Navigation: The building of the University of
AppliedSciencesisdistributedovertheholecityofHamburg.
Another aspect is the research on hybrid navigation. hybrid
navigation is the combination of indoor- and outdoor-
navigation. This expands the scenario in section with
navigation over more than one campus. In this case persons
in to modes, On campus WiFi-based like described in section
VI-A3. Outdoor by use of public transport and determination
of position by GPS. This system will be realised as thesis in
cooperation with the public transport company HVV.
6) ApplicationinLivingPlaceLaboratory: Thedepartment
computer science has a laboratory in the context of “Liv-
ingLabs”, called LivingPlace Hamburg. The laboratory con-
Fig. 2. Dynamic signposting – Semulation in a complex building with a
3D-GameEngine sistsofaflatwhereemergingtechnologiesandresearchresults
shouldbeinstalledforevaluationindailylife.TheApplication
of the technologies and the use in daily life situations should
2) Trailblazers: The paper [39] describes the project expand usability tests with experimental in a daily life like
Trailblazers, which builds community driven navigation situationawayfromsimplelaboratoryusabilitytest.Isexpand
system for mobility impaired people. It’s a GPS-based usability test on studies closer to daily live. The project uses
outdoor solution, which wins the Microsoft Imagine Cup in indoorpositioningmoreforlocation-based-servicesandhybrid
the Year 2006. It’s a mobile Application based von Microsoft navigation, than for simple indoor navigation.
Mobile and special is the generation from content by the use.
VII. CONCLUSION
3) interactive information system: A bachlor project build In this paper, we have described our ambition to apply
a touch information terminal to find stationary informations technologies to build indoor navigation systems. The domain
to find spatial information and other information. It is consists of the following sub-areas: indoor positioning,
installed to find floor based informations. The figure 3 shows Automated Extraction of Geometry and Topology of
a screenshot of the application, with a simple floor like Buildings and Pedestrian Navigation. The composition of
in section V described. It is in development and shows these sub-areas are building the navigation system. Our
the opportunity to use interactive information stations for approach is to evaluate techniques and technologies under
information in as part of a spatial information system for practical conditions. The application is orientated on two
visitors and students. scenarios for indoor navigation to give the goal a practical
background. The technologies are analysed on their achieve
requirements, like the evaluation of the resolution of the
indoor positioning. New forms of orientation like landmarks
and dynamic signposting are tested on benefits for navigation.
The practical test of techniques is done by prototypes.
By complex installation evaluation should been made in a
simulation first.
The fulfilled work are intermediate steps for solutions of
indoor navigation. Approaches like IMAPs or with UWB
have high accuracy, but also require high effort to install the
systems. WiFi has a lower accuracy, but has advantages in
the effort of installation and more and more mobile devices
can be used as positioning client. We evaluate WiFI, which
has a low accuracy, on his applicability to indoor navigation,
Fig.3. InteractiveInformationSystem we prepare the transformation of the CAD-Data into standard
A Screen shot from a touch informations system, which CityGML as Database, and we gather experiences with
shows information about one foor. different types of navigation systems.
4) Curently Related Projects: In the following we describe Apositiveaspectisthepositiveresonanceuponourcurrent
two actual project with a relation to indoor navigation an work. It attract wide interest under involvement of HamburgUniversity of Applied Sciences. All parties are interested to [20] ——,“Dimensionalreductionof3dbuildingmodelsusinggraphtheory
transfer our research findings into real application. and its application in building energy simulation,” Engineering with
Computers,vol.23,no.2,72007.
[21] S. Narasimhan, “Simulation and Optimized Scheduling of Pedestrian
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Traffic,” Ph.D. dissertation, Fakulta¨t Informatik, Elektrotechnik und
The activities to develop and evaluate techniques and tech- InformationstechnikderUniversita¨tStuttgart,2007.
[22] A.BorrmannandE.Rank,“Specificationandimplementationofdirec-
nologies for indoor navigation under practical conditions are
tionaloperatorsina3dspatialquerylanguageforbuildinginformation
part of the project Ubicomp of the university of applied models,”Adv.Eng.Inform.,vol.23,no.1,pp.32–44,2009.
sciences hamburg. [23] J.Lee,“AThree-DimensionalNavigableDataModeltoSupportEmer-
gency Response in Microspatial Built-Environments,” Annals of the
REFERENCES AssociationofAmericanGeographers,vol.97,pp.512–529,2007.
[24] I. R. Karas, F. Batuk5, A. E. Akay6, and I. Baz4, “Automatically Ex-
[1] B. Wendholt, “Dynamisch adaptive Planung individualisierter Touren,” tracting3DModelsandNetworkAnalysisforIndoors,”inInnovations
Ph.D. dissertation, Fachbereich 3 (Mathematik und Informatik) der in3DGeoInformationSystems,2006,pp.395–404.
Universita¨tBremen,2008. [25] G. Retscher, “ Pedestrian navigation systems and location-based ser-
[2] Hamburg University of Applied Sciences, “UbiComp Lab vices,”inFifthIEEInternationalConferenceon3GMobileCommuni-
Homepage,” Letzter Zugriff am 08.02.2009. [Online]. Available: cationTechnologies,2004,pp.359–363.
users.informatik.haw-hamburg.de/ubicomp/ [26] Q.Fu,“ActiveRFIDforPositioningUsingTrilaterationandLocation
[3] R. Malaka and A. Zipf, “DEEP MAP - Challenging IT research in FingerprintingBasedonRSSI,”2008.
the framework of a tourist information system,” in Information and [27] T. Wagner, “Qualitative sicht-basierte Navigation in unstrukturierten
CommunicationTechnologiesinTourism2000,D.Fesenmaier,S.Klein, Umgebungen,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universita¨t Bremen - Fachbereich
andD.Buhalis,Eds.,Barcelona,Spain,2000,pp.15–27. MathematikundInformatik,2007.
[4] G.Abowd,C.Atkeson,J.Hong,S.Long,R.Kooper,andM.Pinkerton, [28] S. Beauregard and H. Haas, “Pedestrian Dead Reckoning (PDR) and
“Cyberguide: A mobile context-aware tour guide,” 1997. [Online]. GPS for Indoor Positioning,” in WPNC’06: Proceedings of the 3’rd
Available:citeseer.ist.psu.edu/abowd97cyberguide.html WorkshoponPositioningNavigationandCommunication,2006,pp.27–
[5] R. Want, B. N. Schilit, N. I. Adams, R. Gold, K. Petersen, 36.
D. Goldberg, J. R. Ellis, and M. Weiser, “The parctab ubiquitous [29] S.Bruning,J.Zapotoczky,P.Ibach,andV.Stantchev,“CooperativePo-
computing experiment,” Tech. Rep., 1995. [Online]. Available: sitioningwithMagicMap,”inWPNC’07.4thWorkshoponPositioning,
citeseer.ist.psu.edu/535.html NavigationandCommunication,2007,pp.17–22.
[6] A. Butz and A. Kru¨ger, “Orts- und richtungsabha¨ngige Information- [30] G.Gartner,A.Frank,andG.Retscher,“PedestrianNavigationSystem
spra¨sentationaufmobilenGera¨ten,”IT+TI,vol.2,pp.90–96,2001. in Mixed Indoor/Outdoor Environment The NAVIO Project,” in Pro-
[7] J. Baus, A. Kru¨ger, and W. Wahlster, “A resource-adaptive mobile ceedingsoftheCORP2004andGeomultimedia04Symposium,Vienna,
navigationsystem,”inIUI2002:InternationalConferenceonIntelligent Austria,2004,pp.165–171.
UserInter-faces,2002,pp.15–22. [31] J. Roth, “A Decentralized Location Service Providing Semantic Loca-
[8] A. Krger, A. Butz, C. Mller, C. Stahl, R. Wasinger, K. Steinberg, tions,” Habilitationsschrift, Informatik Bericht 323, Fernuniversitt Ha-
and A. Dirschl, “The Connected User Interface: Realizing a Personal gen,2005.
SituatedNavigationService,”inProc.ofIUI2004,2004. [32] S. Gregor, “Entwicklung einer hardwareplattform fu¨r die ermittlung
[9] K. Rehrl, N. Go¨ll, S. Leitinger, S. Bruntsch, and H.-J. Mentz, von positionsdaten innerhalb von geba¨uden,” Bachelorthesis, HAW
“Smartphone-basedinformationandnavigationaidsforpublictransport Hamburg,2006.
travellers,”inLocationBasedServicesandTeleCartography. Springer [33] A. Schuman, “Ein einfach benutzbares mobiles navigationssystem fu¨r
BerlinHeidelberg,2007,pp.525–544. fußga¨nger,”Masterthesis,HAWHamburg,2008.
[10] G. Bieber, M. Bliesze, T. Kirste, and R. Oppermann, “Aufgabenorien- [34] B. Kogan, “Gruppennavigationssystem fu¨r fuy¨ga¨nger auf basis der
tierte und situationsgesteuerte Computerunterstu¨tzung fu¨r mobile An- dynamischenbeschilderung,”Masterthesis,HAWHamburg,2009.
wendungeninIndoor-Umgebungen,”inMensch&Computer,M.Her- [35] J.Napitupulu,“Indoormapserverineinemflughafenszenario,”HAW
czegandH.Oberquelle,Eds. Teubner,2002. Hamburg,Tech.Rep.,2007.
[11] F. FIT, “SAiMotion,” http://www.t.fraunhofer.de/projekte/saimotion/, [36] A. Schumann, “Indoornavigationssystem im flughafenszenario,” HAW
2005. Hamburg,Tech.Rep.,2007.
[12] N. Henze, M. Lim, A. Lorenz, M. Mueller, X. Righetti, E. Rukzio, [37] M. Koychev, “Indoornavigation mit nutzung von ortsabha¨ngigen und
A. Zimmermann, N. Magnenat-Thalmann, S. Boll, and D. Thalmann, adhocdiensten,”HAWHamburg,Tech.Rep.,2007.
“ContextualBookmarks,”inProceedingsoftheJointWorkshopMobile [38] E. Kutak, “Hardwareplattform fu¨r positionsbestimmung innerhalb von
InteractionwiththeRealWorld(MIRW2007),2007,pp.51–54. geba¨uden,”HAWHamburg,Tech.Rep.,2007.
[13] J.L.EncarnacaoandT.Kirste,“Beyondthedesktop:Naturalinteraction [39] S. Stegelmeier, M. Stein, M. Thome´, and P. Wendt, “Trailblazers - a
and intelligent assistance for the everyday life,” in Alltag der Zukunft communitydrivennavigationsystemformobilityimpairedpeople,”in
-Informationstechnikvera¨ndertunserLeben,HeinzNixdorfMuseums- ASK-ITInternationalConference,2006.
forum,Ed.,2000,p.3957.
[14] R.OppermannandM.Specht,“AContext-SensitiveNomadicExhibition
Guide,” in HUC2K: Second Symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous
Computing,2000,pp.127–149.
[15] O. Stock, M. Zancanaro, P. Busetta, C. B. Callaway, A. Kru¨ger,
M. Kruppa, T. Kuflik, E. Not, and C. Rocchi, “Adaptive, intelligent
presentation of information for the museum visitor in PEACH,” User
Model.User-Adapt.Interact.,vol.17,no.3,pp.257–304,2007.
[16] P.-Y. Gillieron, D. Buchel, I. Spassov, and B. Merminod, Eds., Indoor
Navigation Performance Analysis. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: enc
gnss2004,2004.
[17] P.Gillie´ronandB.Merminod,“PersonalNavigationSystemForIndoor
Applications,”in11thIAINWorldCongress,2003.
[18] P. Zweiacker, “Syste`me dinformation ge´ographique pour navigation
pe´destrea` linte´rieurdesbaˆtiments,”DiplomaThesis,EPFL,2003.
[19] C. van Treeck and E. Rank, “Analysis of building structure and
topology based on Graph Theory,” in International Conference
on Computing in Civil and Building Engineering, 2004. [Online].
Available:http://e-pub.uni-weimar.de/volltexte/2004/238/
View publication stats