Fourth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
A Location-aware System using RFID and Mobile Devices for Art Museums
R. Tesoriero, J. A. Gallud, M. Lozano, V. M. R. Penichet
Computer Systems Department
Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha
Campus universitario s/n, 02071 Albacete, Spain
{ricardo, jgallud, mlozano, vpenichet}@dsi.uclm.es
Abstract Previous proposals show the interest of this topic [1,
2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9]. The main difference between
Emerging location-aware mobile technologies are previous proposals and the one we are proposing in
being applied successfully in cultural environments. this paper is the way in which our system uses RFID,
Different technologies, such as RFID, WiFi, and so on, due to mobility issues.
are being applied to allow mobile devices interact with The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in
the environment. This paper describes a system based Section 2 we present a brief description of the
on both active and passive RFID which support the conceptual model we have defined to support the
automatic positioning of mobile devices in art location aware system. Then, in Section 3 we explore
museums. This proposal results especially useful to the positioning system technology employed to
provide location-aware information avoiding the need develop the system. And finally, the conclusions about
for users to manually select the desired information the work are presented in Section 4.
they want to see. This proposal has been successfully
proved for the location and positioning of PDAs. 2. Conceptual modeling for location-
awareness in cultural spaces
1. Introduction
One of the primary tasks related to the design of
Mobile technologies are present in our daily life and location-aware mobile software for museums is the
their use seems to be restricted to support phone calls definition of a conceptual model.
or to organize our work schedule. We think that these We think a museum entity is conceptually
devices can be used in different scenarios, for instance, composed by, at least, two types of information, the
in cultural environments. Modern museums offer Catalogue Information and the Environmental
visitors different devices to guide them and enjoy their Information.
visit. Often, these electronic guides provide visitors Catalogue Information is related to museum registry
with audio information about the pieces exhibited in and it is stored according to defined structures and
the museum in several languages. procedures that museums should follow to accomplish
The introduction of new technologies in cultural international standards [5]. Usually, this information is
environments has enriched the way in which art objects available in electronic format and is described in
are exposed to visitors. However, these technologies technical language. We focused our efforts on defining
have not been as successful as audio guides in the past a model that represents the information surrounding a
because these guides keep being the most popular piece instead of the piece itself. We called this
device to guide users inside museums. information as “environmental information”.
Positioning systems are common in software Any art object or piece exhibited in a museum is
applications related to geographic information. An wrapped by extra information depending on the
interesting challenge is related to the fact of how to exposition environment; for example, the piece
locate a mobile device inside buildings, for instance art physical place. So, a central item of our model is the
museums. Space. A piece must be exposed into a Space and it
This paper defines a conceptual model for a also has a Space associated to it.
museum to support an automatic positioning system Pieces are usually exposed within a container. This
based on a well known technology such as RFID. container may be represented by a showcase (if it
0-7695-3093-1/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE 76
DOI 10.1109/ICAS.2008.38contains small objects) or a frame (in case of a are exhibited in containers. However, there is some
painting), or anything that is able to contain a piece. A intangible information that is not catalogued, for
Space is also associated to one or more graphical instance descriptions of temporal events or
representations, resources and identifiers. geographical characteristics. To solve this problem,
An overview of the conceptual model is depicted in this information is provided to visitors through panels.
Figure 1. Panels contain graphical information regarding events
An interesting thing to point out is the fact that the that do not have any physical representation in the
Identifier entity allows the system to be isolated from exposition.
the specific technology used to locate an object in the Sometimes, large showcases are divided into
real world (RFID, WIFI, etc). Besides, this object may regions to organize pieces in groups to improve the
be also identified by one or more Identifiers; so it is information understanding. Each region is represented
possible to use different positioning and location by a section that groups related pieces in some way.
technologies at the same time to improve the system As a consequence, pieces are contextualized according
precision. For instance, you can use RFID to identify a to defined criteria providing a context for each group.
showcase and a code bar to identify a piece within the Pieces are physically represented by the
showcase. PieceRepresentation entity. It relates the physical space
Another important issued to point out is the fact in which the piece is settled with the information
that, although a museum may have a media repository related to the piece.
associated to its catalogue, this information is not The only linking point between the catalogue
always appropriate to be exposed to public in general information and the environmental information is
[9]. Usually, it is expressed in technical language and established by the relationship between
should be adapted to ordinary people. So, in order to PieceRepresentation and Piece. Thus, we decouple the
adapt this information, we created the Resource entity piece physical representation (modeled by
that represents the content that is ready to be exposed PieceRepresentation) from the piece technical
to visitors. This content may be images, audios, videos information (modeled by Piece). And decoupling these
or texts. These resources should be also customized in entities we can adapt our conceptual model to any kind
different languages in order to fit users’ needs. of pieces.
Pieces are not the only spaces that may have The GraphicRepresentation class is the graphical
information related to it. Often, rooms, floors and even representation of a space. Depending on the visitor’s
the building provide contextual information about the point of view, a space can be seen from different
pieces they contain. perspectives. We have defined two ways of visualizing
Thus, a museum is a cultural environment that may spaces: Internally and Externally.
be physically organized in one or more buildings. A The Internal representation is used to show the
building is divided into floors and a floor is divided space itself (for instance a floor, building or room
into rooms. In a room we can find terminals. A map), while the external representation depicts the
terminal represents a device that can be placed into a space from its container’s point of view. This feature
room. It can be a showcase or a panel. allows the system to manage two abstraction levels of
As we mentioned before, museums usually have information providing the user with accurate
information about the catalogued pieces. These pieces information but avoiding information overload.
77Figure 1. Museum conceptual model
3. Positioning mobile devices in cultural
spaces
The desired functionality of the system includes the
use of context aware information to provide a richer
user experience. Additionally, we integrate our
solution to a software application currently running in
the museum (the catalogue application).
The positioning subsystem is responsible for giving
the PDA an identification to locate the device
according to a relative or absolute position. The
automatic database synchronization subsystem is
responsible for maintaining the coherence between
both the internal and external databases. As internal
Figure 2: Passive and active tags and readers
database we mean the database that may be already
installed in the museum containing the pieces
When a user with a PDA visits the museum, he or
catalogue and, eventually, a media repository. An
she can download and run the client program in the
external database refers to our specific database to
museum’s entrance hall.
support the positioning subsystem, the information to
In order to retrieve information related to the pieces
be displayed to visitors, internationalization issues and
exhibited in the museum, the user may choose between
so on.
auto-navigation mode and manual navigation mode.
Figure 2 shows both active and passive RFID tags
Manual navigation mode allows users to navigate
and a PDA including a RFID reader.
along the building using cursor keys or the PDA
stencil. On the other hand, the PDA can automatically
78detect the position of the user in the museum and In this case, the technique requires the use of
retrieve the correct information according to the PDA passive RFID tags that are detected by the reader at 5-8
location within the museum reducing in this way the cm from the tag (that is hidden by the label or mark).
user clicks on the PDA, as he does not need to select
anything at all. 3.1.3. The higher level. The higher level requires even
The variety of positioning systems available in the more attention from the users than the previous levels.
market made us to define a system separately from the It requires the user to point with a device to an object
hardware employed to locate users. Thus, the client or label in order to retrieve the information about an art
program running in the PDA can receive information piece or space. This kind of interaction is not as natural
from the environment in many ways: infrared sensors, as the other alternatives, but it provides a good method
active or passive RFID tags, Bluetooth, WiFi devices when the information is not easily reachable due of
or any other system available now or to appear in the distance issues.
future. This way, the client sends the location Suppose that we would like to retrieve information
information to the server and gets back the requested about an artifact that hangs from the roof. In this case,
information according to the PDA location. the user points the device to the objective and retrieves
The main advantage of this system is the possibility the information about it.
to interact with the environment in three levels of In order to implement this alternative, IR
attention. technology is used because the directional
characteristics of this kind of light are worth for this
3.1. Interaction at different levels of attention purpose.
In this paper we are discussing the user interaction 3.2 Space granularity
according to different levels of attention required for
the user to operate the system. Space granularity is based on the idea that spaces
We have defined 3 levels of attention and, in this can be seen as a tree where each node represents a
section, we discuss different ways of implementing space and the edges represents the composition
them based on novel and well-known technologies. relationship.
The Root is the space that contains all the spaces
3.1.1. The lower level. The lower level of attention which we are going to provide information of. On the
allows the user to perceive the periphery with almost contrary, Leaves are objects that cannot be divided into
no attention from him/her. So the user can perform other ones -in the spatial aspect- to get information.
other activities without paying attention to the They usually are the art objects.
periphery. However, he or she can be aware of The interaction techniques described above will be
interesting events that may occur nearby them. applied to get information about spaces according to
For instance, suppose that a group of people is two granularity levels: coarse grained and fine grained
visiting a gallery while they are talking, and they may (see Figure 3).
come across with an important masterpiece without
noticing. In such case, the system can alert the visitors 3.2.1. Coarse grained spaces. In coarse grained
about the event taking visitor’s attention to prevent spaces the system is able to perceive the location of the
them from missing it. user according to a space position. So, the lower level
The technological approach to tackle this problem is of attention may fit this situation. Thus, the most
based on active RFID tags and readers. When a PDA is suitable technology to be used is the active RFID. The
close to an interesting point, the user is notified about environment provides mobile users with the
it and the information related to the point is information of the periphery using tags while mobile
automatically retrieved from the server to the PDA. software detects these tags and recognizes art objects
(for instance, a statue or a masterpiece) allowing users
3.1.2. The medium level. The medium level of to download additional information about it.
attention takes more attention from the user in order to
get the information about the different objects because 3.2.2. Fine grained spaces. Fine grained mode is
he or she has to perform an explicit action (or gesture) used to identify objects when the user position is not
to retrieve the information about a piece or space. precise enough to retrieve information about it. In this
For instance, if we are watching a showcase and we case we may use passive RFID or infrared according to
want to get some information about a specific piece, the situation. Thus, we are applying the medium or
we have to place the device near the piece label (or higher level of attention of the user.
mark) to retrieve extra information about it.
79An example of this situation is the selection of a Then, it receives the client requests and fetches the
piece among a set of them placed in a showcase. related information from the database sending it back
to the client. As a consequence, this information is
displayed on the client screen.
4. Conclusions
This paper introduces a novel interaction model to
retrieve information for museums and art galleries
using mobile devices and RFID technology (although
different technologies are also supported).
We start describing a conceptual model that
supports information retrieval independently of the
location technology used to identify the user location
or interest.
The system allows the user to retrieve information
according to three levels of attention avoiding this way
the need for users to make manual selections in the
PDA to get the desired information. The lower level of
attention allows users to retrieve information without
having to pay attention to the surroundings. Finally, the
higher level of attention requires the user to point with
the device to the object in which he is interested.
Two granularity levels regarding space are also
Figure 3. Granularity Levels introduced to apply the interaction model described.
Additional considerations have been taken into
3.3 Additional considerations regarding the account to ease and improve some of the most complex
proposed solution aspects concerning this system, such as communication
protocol and portability.
An important aspect to note is the possibility of
using passive and active RFID simultaneously. In this 5. References
situation a hardware problem may appear. Most of the
current commercially available PDAs have only one [1] C. Barber, H. Bristow, S. Cheng, A. Hedley, Y.
Compact Flash slot, if any; and RFID readers are only Kuriyama, M. Lien, J. Pollard and P. Sorrell. Augmenting
available in this format for PDA. Therefore, we may Museums and Art Galleries. Human-Computer Interaction
use a Compact Flash hub in order to get active and INTERACT '01, The International Federation for
passive RFID reader working together. Information Processing, Tokyo, Japan, 2001, 439-447.
This solution also encourages the application
[2] C. Ciavarella and F. Paternò, F. The design of a handheld,
portability. In order to achieve it, we have proposed an
location-aware guide for in-door environments. Personal and
architecture to support portability among mobile
Ubiquitous Computing, Springer Verlag, 2004, Vol.8 N.2 82-
devices by designing it as general as possible.
91.
For instance, interface portability is an important
issue to take into account when designing portable [3] J. A. Gallud, V. M. R. Penichet, L. Argandeña, P.
device software because of the fast development of this González and J. A. García. Digital Museums: a multi-
technology. technological approach. HCI - International Conference
As result of this evolution, mobile devices such as 2005. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (ISBN 0-8058-5807-5).
Las Vegas (USA). July 2005.
PDAs and Smartphones are turning desktop offices
into mobile offices.
[4] R. E. Grinter, P. M. Aoki, A. Hurst, M. H. Szymanski, J.
Another important issue regarding mobile devices is
D. Thornton and A. Woodruff. Revisiting the Visit:
the communication protocol. In order to keep it as
Understanding How Technology Can Shape the Museum
compatible as possible, the information is managed Visit. In Proc. ACM Conf. on Computer Supported
using XML through an HTTP connection. Cooperative Work, New Orleans, LA., 2002
Finally, in order to receive information, the mobile
device sends the location information to the server. [5] International Guidelines for Museum Object Information:
The CIDOC Information Categories. International
80Committee for Documentation of the International Council of
Museums ICOM-CIDOC. In Proc. ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ISBN 92-9012-124-
6, New Orleans, LA. 1995.
[6] S. Long, R. Kooper, G. D. Abowd and C. G. Atkeson.
Rapid Prototyping of Mobile Context-aware Applications:
The Cyberguide Case Study. 2nd ACM International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MobiCom'96), November 10-12, 1996.
[7] F. Paternò and C. Santoro. Exploiting mobile devices to
support museum visits through multi-modal interfaces and
multi-device games. WebIST 2007, Barcelona, Spain, March
3-6, 2007.
[8] R. Tesoriero, M. D. Lozano, J. A. Gallud, V. M. R.
Penichet. Evaluating the users’ ex-perience of a PDA-Based
Software Applied in Art Museums. WebIST 2007, Barcelona,
Spain, March 3-6, 2007.
[9] M. Milosavljevic, R. Dale, S. J. Green, C. Paris and S.
Williams. Virtual museums on the informationsuperhighway:
prospects and potholes. Proceedings of the Annual
Conference on the International Committee for
Documentation of the International Council of Museums
(CIDOC’98), Melburne, Australia, October 10-14, 1998
81