Thinking Aloud in Search of Landmark
Characteristics in an Indoor Environment
Pepijn Viaene, AnnVanclooster, Kristien Ooms, Philippe De Maeyer
Geography Department
Ghent University
Ghent, Belgium
Pepijn.Viaene@UGent.be
Abstract—The last decade has seen an increase in the was one of the first authors to define (outdoor) landmarks as
attention towards indoor space and its applications. Within this “physical elements in space which can be unambiguously
research topic, landmarks play an important role as these distinct referred to in route instructions”. A more extensive definition,
objects exert important functions in the context of navigation and given by [9], states that a landmark is a prominent and
in the construction of a cognitive model of an environment. identifiable element in an environment (external to man) that
However, compared to outdoor research, little research has been enables an observer to locate himself and to set objectives like
conducted related to indoor landmarks and their specific reaching a destination or selecting an optimal route.
characteristics with respect to their use and description.
Therefore, the presented study aims to investigate when or where Clearly, not every object meets the needs of the definitions
landmarks are mostly needed during a navigational task in a above. According to [7], a landmark must satisfy three
building and how they are verbally expressed. In order to fundamental qualities: persistence, information content and
examine these aspects, eleven test persons completed a route in a saliency. First, a landmark is persistent if present at a certain
complex building. While navigating, they had to think out loud location at any given time in order to be able to use as a
and their verbal descriptions were analyzed and compared. The reference. Second, it has to be informative, pointing at the
results of this study show that landmarks were most needed on information about the position of the navigator it provides and
locations where a change of orientation took place. In addition,
what action one has to undertake. Third, a landmark is salient if
most referrals were made to objects near the observer.
it is easily detectable and recognizable [7]. Especially saliency
Furthermore, participants preferred to use common nouns to
is crucial, because saliency indicates the quality of a landmark
refer to a landmark and more detailing was given by specifying
and refers to the relative distinction, visibility and notable
color and material. Finally, the results indicate that
features of an object with respect to its surroundings [10], [11].
predominantly the same elements form the basis to identify an
indoor landmark as an outdoor landmark, namely visual, Following, several types of landmarks can be identified.
structural and semantic features. Some make a difference between object landmarks, as being
objects that are independent of the building’s structure, and
Keywords—navigation;wayfinding;think aloud
structural landmarks [7].In contrast, the landmark theory of [9]
suggests three categories of specific features that contribute to
I. INTRODUCTION the saliency of a landmark: visual, semantic and structural.
Finding one’s way in an environment in search of a Visual landmarks distinguish themselves based on visual
destination is part of everyday life. Unfortunately, a complex aspects such as shape, position and visibility in the
indoor environment may entail specific problems for environment, color, age and size. This is similar to the notion
wayfinding and navigation [1]. For example, the third of the previously mentioned object landmark. Following,
dimension (i.e. various floor levels), which is characteristic for semantic or cognitive landmarks are recognizable because of
most buildings, has an impact on wayfinding performances [2]. their meaning. This can be a broadly dispersed historical
Additionally, buildings are often composed of fragmented meaning or a unique connotation only known by a few people.
areas with a limited field of view and changes in direction Finally, structural landmarks are seen as objects that exert an
occur more frequently than outdoors [3]. These elements lead important function because of their role or location in the
to disorientation, which represents one of the main difficulties structure of the spatial environment. Examples are accessible
while moving through a building [4]. and prominent elements such as intersections, dead-ends and
large open spaces. In most cases, they are marked by a high
In order to resolve this loss of orientation, people can rely degree of connectivity [9], [12]. The most suitable landmarks
on landmarks, which are the basis of the cognitive model of an are those that meet the demands of all categories. For example,
environment that is used by a navigator to find his or her way. a library that is painted red and located near a large central
Especially in the first stages of a mental map’s development, a intersection would be perceived as highly salient.
space is seen as a loose collection of landmarks, which serve as
anchor points, without spatial coherence [5]–[7].Reference [8] Compared to outdoor studies, few studies have focused
specifically on the use of landmarks indoors, although they can
This research would not have been possible without the financial support
of the Special Research Fund (“Bijzonder Onderzoeksfonds” (BOF)).
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 103
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEEserve as powerful wayfinding tools. Moreover, most indoor research has been conducted related specifically to the location
studies base themselves on conclusions made in an outdoor of landmarks in an indoor context, our second research
context. For example, Reference [3] focused on active indoor question is the following: “When or where are landmarks
landmarks that implement radio-frequency identification, but needed most?”
built upon conclusions made in an outdoor environment, such
In this paper we will start by giving an overview of the
as the landmark theory of [9] and for the derivation of
setup of the conducted experiment and processing of the
landmarks they relied on the outdoor research of [12].
acquired data, which allowed us to determine which landmarks
Similarly, for explaining the functions of conventional non-
were used and how they were described by the different test
active landmarks they referred to a study made by [13], which
persons. This is followed by a summary of the most interesting
also stems from research on outdoor landmarks. Following, in
and relevant results, which constitutes the synthesis of a word,
[1] the authors tried to develop a landmark-based pedestrian
sentence and location analysis. In the fourth section, the results
navigation system. Although this system provided promising
will be the subject of a discussion that focusses on the two
and good results, it can be noted that here as well outdoor
main objectives of this paper, namely the description of
research formed the basis for this study. Other experiments,
landmarks and their location.
like those of [7], took place in virtual indoor environments.
Concluding, one might question whether or not outdoor
characteristics are valid in real indoor environments. For II. STUDY DESIGN
example, would a secretariat that is painted red and located
near a large central intersection within a building be perceived A. Tasks
equally as salient like the previously mentioned library in an An adaptation of an experiment conducted by [13] was
outdoor environment? used as research method. In this previous experiment verbal
descriptions of landmarks and information about the
This study seeks to gain more insight into two aspects of
distribution of those landmarks were collected after completing
indoor landmarks that are vital for the formulation of route
a route twice by recording route instructions after the second
instructions, namely their location and description. Evaluating
time the route was completed. However, these route
a landmark’s description is useful, because an adequate and
instructions only comprised a limited amount of potential
correct description, which can capture the (visual)
landmarks, namely those remembered. Therefore, a slightly
characteristics, is needed to communicate clearly about these
different methodology was applied in our study during both
objects when using them in route instructions. Various authors
traversals of the route: concurrent thinking aloud. This results
(e.g. [1], [14]) emphasize the importance of conducting further
in a more comprehensive outline of all salient objects along the
research on the descriptions of landmarks in order to increase
route and their features. Furthermore, video images were used
efficiency of verbal route instructions and to reduce the
to unambiguously identify landmark and their location. Finally,
difficulties experienced by the users. Therefore, our first
since this report deals with indoor landmarks, our study was
research question is: “What are the general characteristics and
situated in an indoor environment in contrast to the experiment
descriptions of indoor landmarks?”
of [13].
Equally important for the creation of proper route
The present experiment consisted of four parts. In the first
instructions is acquiring knowledge about the location of
part, the participants were asked to tell something about
landmarks. A coordinated relocation in an environment (i.e.
themselves and to solve a fairly simple mathematical problem
navigation) requires distinguishable physical objects (i.e.
aloud. These two tasks gave the participants the opportunity to
landmarks) to specify the location where an action (e.g. “walk
become familiar with the think aloud method, making them
towards” or “make a turn at”) should take place. Hence,
feel comfortable to share their thoughts aloud [17], [18]. In the
defining the adequate location of these ‘view-action-pairs’ is
second part, the participants were asked to follow the
needed to provide route directions of good quality in order to
experimenter (as they were not yet acquainted with the route).
facilitate navigation performances [6], [15]. Outdoor landmark
The participants were asked to apply the think aloud method
research has recognized two main location-based functions for
during this completion as follows: “Describe all things that
landmarks in navigation: orientation point and checkpoint.
come to mind while completing the route, ranging from visual
First, outdoor landmarks that serve as orientation point allow a
stimuli and scents to sounds and feelings related to the route
navigator to anticipate points where extra attention is needed
and the navigational task”. In the third part of the experiment,
because of a potential change in direction [15]. This is the case
the experimenter followed the test persons in their second
at decision points with intersections of at least three road
traversal of the route and only intervened if the participant was
segments. This vision was applied by [10]. Similarly, [16] saw
lost or asked for help. This action of the observer is believed to
the environment as a network of graphs where outdoor
have no influence on the thinking aloud process and test results
landmarks were only needed at the nodes. Second, landmarks
[18]. Before the second traversal, they were instructed to
are important to ensure the navigator that he is still on the
“apply the think aloud method in the same way as during the
correct route [3] and to allow the observer to reorient himself if
first completion but with specific attention to the objects that
needed [13]. These are seen as checkpoints. Most studies
helped them to retrace the route or gave confirmation that they
situated in an outdoor context presuppose that people will
were on the correct route”. Note that the participants were
mostly fall back on landmarks when they need them to take a
aware that the goal of the experiment was to study indoor
decision about the action (e.g. change of direction) that should
wayfinding. Finally, at the end of the experiment, the
be unfolded at a specific location. However, as very little
participants were asked six questions. For example, they were
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 104
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEEasked to draw the route on a floor plan of the building and, if
applicable, to explain why they went the wrong way during the
experiment. The questions of part one and four were handed to
them at the starting point of the route in the form of a
structured query sheet, which also gave an overview of the
proceedings of the experiment.
As mentioned earlier, in order to capture all possible
descriptions of landmarks during the experiment, the think
aloud method will be applied. This method involves
participants sharing their thoughts aloud while executing a
specific task and is a unique supplier of qualitative and
complete data regarding cognitive processes. Concurrent think
aloud offers some advantages. Participants are not required to
remember thoughts, but can communicate them immediately in
an objective and undistorted way [19]. Moreover, this method
only has a limited influence on the actions and thoughts of the
participant and, consequently, on the test results [18].
Nonetheless, two major disadvantages can be noted. First, if a
person does not verbalize all thoughts, this will lead to a
fragmented dataset. This could be resolved by a retrospective
questioning, but then the risk exists that participants will
rationalize their actions in order to give answers whereof they
think it is expected of them [19]. Second, the obtained data is
highly dependent on the selection of test persons and therefore
in some way subjective. An adequate sample population is vital
[17]. Finally, as the participants are expected to retrace the
route, whereby landmarks play an important role [20], the think
aloud method is used to identify landmarks via the cognitive
processes related to (indoor) wayfinding. This is similar to
[21]. In some studies (e.g. [22], [23]), the participants are asked
to describe an environment without relating the noticed
elements to a wayfinding task. Here, it is questionable whether
the described elements can be considered landmarks as they are
not used in a navigational context.
B. Study Area
The building in which the experiment took place was the
“Institute of Sciences” of Ghent University (see Fig. 1). It can
be seen as a complex set of interconnected buildings. Various
junctions were characterized by a high level of connectivity,
which emphasized the need for landmarks to aid navigational
decisions. The route, used during the experiment, was
characterized by an alternation of open spaces and corridors,
passing through various zones and floors. A zone, namely an
area within the building with similar design and function, could
Fig. 1. Representation of the indoor test environment in which the route is
easily be distinguished based on its color and material. This represented by the thick black line.
was helpful for the participants to become familiar with the
route [4]. Furthermore, the zones offered a huge variety of C. Participants and Materials
potential landmarks, which allowed a comprehensive insight in
In total seven males and seven females participated in our
whether or not objects were identified as landmarks. The zones
experiment. They were all in their twenties and the degree of
also had different visual ranges to determine the distance at
familiarity with the building varied. Due to equipment
which landmarks were selected. The choice to frequent various
problems, three female participants were excluded.
floors was underpinned by the fact that several authors (e.g.
[3], [21]) have stated that this often resulted in a loss of The think aloud method required the registration of the test
orientation and that landmarks were exceedingly adequate to persons’ verbalizations and the recordings of where they were
overcome this problem. The route itself had the same start and looking at to be able to correctly interpret their utterances.
end point and was approximately 380 m long, which took Hence, a headset was used combined with a webcam. These
about seven minutes to complete. Longer routes can cause were mounted on the person’s head and were connected to a
confusion or doubt [4]. laptop that recorded sound and images. The test persons carried
the laptop in a backpack during the experiment.
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 105
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEED. Data Processing The word analysis reveals that external features were often
used to describe an object in more detail. Materials (e.g.
During the data processing, the recorded verbal utterances
“wood” (28 times cited), “glass” (26)) formed a substantial
were transcribed and subsequently analyzed. The analysis of
element of the verbalizations.Colors were equally important to
these transcriptions was done on three levels. First, a word
describe an object, especially colors that inflicted great contrast
analysis was carried out. An alphabetical list was formed
with their immediate surroundings. For example, pale yellow,
containing all words mentioned during the experiment (both
which is present on almost all walls along the route, was
traversals of the route) and their frequency. Second, a sentence
mentioned only twice, while blue elements (noticeable on one
analysis was conducted using protocol analysis with the aid of
door and a small wall) were mentioned 28 times. Furthermore,
the software package Elan EUDICO Linguistic Annotator
the state or condition of the object was described in various
(version 4.4.0) [24]. The verbal protocols were split into
ways: 65 referrals related to age (e.g. “old”, “modern”, “new”)
segments. Each segment referred to a specific action, object,
and 27 times the appearance was described (e.g. “weird”,
explanation or silence. These segments were then linked to a
“strange”). Shapes and sizes were quoted rarely. Furthermore,
predefined set of annotations listed in five tiers. This provided
the descriptions of these objects varied in word choice and in
standardized information about the actions of the test persons
extensiveness in which they were experienced and described.
and their thoughts. An overview of the coding scheme is
presented in Fig. 2. For example, the statement “we are With respect to the objects themselves, staircases were
walking towards the yellow door” was annotated as follows: mentioned 192 times. Notwithstanding a lot of staircases are
‘action’ (walking towards), ‘landmark’ (door), ‘object’ (door), present on the trajectory, viewed proportionally it remains a
‘point’ (door), ‘color and material’ (yellow). Every test person high frequency. Besides stairs, floors received a lot of attention
led to two recordings; one for each time the route was as well. In total 43 referrals were made to the various floors
completed. Finally, a location analysis was conducted. All frequented along the route. Both are characterized by a vertical
objects that were mentioned regardless of their features or movement. Associated with this vertical movement were words
descriptions were visualized on a floor plan. For the sentence indicating going up (31) or down (70). The word “downstairs”
and location analysis, only the objects mentioned during the was cited in 95 % of the recordings. The two courtyards were
second traversal of the route were used, because the think aloud mentioned 53 times, while going inside and outside the
instruction for the second completion of the route directed the building were referred to respectively 22 and 45 times. Finally,
participants more in describing the potential landmarks. auditoriums, corridors, toilets, signs and closets were
Moreover, the participants were better able to assess the mentioned numerous times. Remarkable, the elevator was only
saliency of these objects when the entire route is known in mentioned 26 times although it is quite unique along the route
contrast with the first time that the route was completed [6]. and was seen several times during the completion of the route.
An explanation could be its inconspicuous grey color, which
III. RESULTS was mentioned in only 3 out of 22 recordings.
The experiment consisted of recording the descriptions of Finally, words that refer to orientation or directions were
landmarks formulated out loud by 11 test persons during the cited often: “direction” (39), “right” (114), “left” (83) … The
dual completion of a route in a complex building. In this last two were mentioned in 20 of the 22 recordings.
manner, more information was gathered about the description
and location of potential landmarks. B. Results of the Sentence Analysis
1) Analysis of the Tier Comment
A. Results of the Word Analysis
The annotations C_research, C_random and C_n/a
In total 1628 different words were used during both comprise segments that contain respectively questions related
completions of the route. An explanation for this wide range of to the experiment, irrelevant utterances and silences. On
expressions is that a single object can be specified with various average, these comprised less than 1 % of all verbal segments.
appellations, which are not necessarily correct. “Fire The annotations C_direction and C_landmark are more of
installation”, “fire extinguisher”, “fire thing”, “fire hose”, “fire interest. All statements that expressed a direction without
cabinet”, “fire unit”, “fire hydrant”, “fire cable” all related to making a reference to an object to describe a navigational
the same object. Similar examples can be given for courtyards, action were annotated with C_direction. Statements that did
closets and staircases. refer to a potential landmark were assigned with C_landmark.
When comparing these annotations, it is clear that most
statements contained a landmark (17 % C_direction, 83 %
C_landmark). On average, 54 potential landmarks were
mentioned with a standard deviation of 18.
In a next step, the various expressions with the annotation
C_landmark were assigned to either the category “object
landmark” or “structural landmark” (analogue to the study of
[7]). The resulting ratio was 51 % and 49 % respectively.
When looking at the share of potential landmarks (object and
Fig. 2. Coding scheme used during the sentence analysis depicting the tiers and structural) with a semantic component, 23 % had a semantic
their annotations. component in addition to their visual or structural saliency. On
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 106
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEEthe one hand, this semantic component was derived from signs,
which assigned a function to a room (e.g. “B002 - the
archives”, “physics laboratory”). On the other hand, familiarity
with the environment was apparent (e.g. “the office of my
tutor”). The fact that several test persons mentioned the
secretariat or the conference room, but did not mention rooms
similar to these without a special function or meaning,
indicated that elements with specific semantics – derived from
signs or foreknowledge – had a greater saliency.
2) Analysis of the Tier Landmark
The tier Landmark offers more insight in the kind of
potential landmarks that were mentioned during the second
completion of the route. These were annotated with Fig. 3. Representation of the annotation ratios for the tier description.
C_landmark in the tier Comment. Physical objects (L_object),
apart from signs, (e.g. doors, closets, posters, stairs) were most C. Results of the Location Analysis
cited during the completion of the route (i.e. 77 %). They were
After depicting all mentioned objects on a floor plan of the
present along the entire route and highly outnumbered the
environment on their corresponding locations, two conclusions
number of signs in the building, which only represented 19 %
can be drawn. First, most potential landmarks are located very
of described elements.
close to the observer. Only 26 objects, which correspond with
Non-visual elements were mentioned least: 4 % with a 15 % of all objects, are located further than two meter from the
standard deviation of 3 %. This category contained references path of the participants. Second, concentrations of objects were
to scents and other objective elements that are not perceivable present whenever a change of direction occurred, even when
on the spot and can only be known by people that were familiar there were no or very limited options. In order to quantify this
with the environment to some extent. A large amount (41 %) of presumption, 21 decision points along the route were
these remarks specified the possible or future use of a location identified. A decision point was defined as being a location
or object. “We arrive at the courtyard, the ideal location to were a change of direction occurs and multiple options were
smoke”, “this is where I work” and “this will become a library” possible for the continuation of the route. For each decision
are some examples. Furthermore, 45 % of these non-visual point, the number of described objects within a certain distance
elements predicted which zone followed on to the current zone (i.e. 2, 3, 4 or 5 meter) was determined. In addition the score,
or recounted who works or has studied there. The remaining 4 which is the amount of described objects multiplied by the
% comprised referrals to scents, temperatures and sounds. number of times that these objects were mentioned by all
participants, was calculated. The results are presented in Fig. 4.
3) Analysis of the Tier Type For example, the area around the decision points within a
Based on the data arising from the analysis of the tier Type, distance of two meter comprises 20 % of the route, 35 % of the
point objects (e.g. doors) were cited most frequent. This was mentioned objects and 33 % of the total score of all mentioned
the case in 44 % of the potential landmarks. Line (e.g. stairs) objects. The same ratio is present for the areas with a radius of
and polygon (e.g. courtyards) elements were mentioned to the three, four and five meter around each decision point.
same extent, namely 29 % and 27 % respectively.
In addition to this, fewer elements were described towards
4) Analysis of the Tier Description the end of a longer segment, like a corridor. However, one
Fig. 3 clearly demonstrates that most objects were referred notable exception can be found on the second floor whereby
to by their common noun. Following, state was mentioned 13 potential landmarks were spread evenly across this segment.
%. Colors and materials were used in 10 % of the cases to This hallway was characterized by a lay-out with various glass
describe or specify an element along the route. With respect to walls that created smaller rooms. Thus, this specific spatial unit
color, a striking situation occurred with one of the test persons appeared to be experienced as a collection of smaller
during his second traversal. The participant doubted whether he compartments, which could explain the larger distribution of
had to go left or right at a fork intersection. He decided to take potential landmarks.
a look in both corridors. Immediately, he noticed that one hall
Two landmarks were mentioned by all test persons: the
way was painted red and that such a corridor was not
VTK, this is the home and name of a student’s union, and a
frequented the first time the trajectory was completed. The
wooden spiral staircase. Finally, doors were mentioned
other corridor, with blue elements, on the other hand was
manifold when entering a new area. This was already
recognized positively. This is an example on how contrasting
established in the word analysis, where 125 references were
colors can be decisive in reconstructing the route. Finally,
made to a door. The word “door” was mentioned 96 times and
shape was only mentioned for 4 % of the landmarks and the
occurred in all but one recording.
majority of those referrals dealt with the size of the object and
not with the geometry.
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 107
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEEcolors to describe a landmark could be less appropriate in
modern buildings.
Some emphasize the importance of the shape to describe an
object [12]. Exceptional surfaces, unorthodox figures and
special geometries of an object would enhance the visual
saliency. This conclusion, however, is much less prominent in
this study. Shape was only mentioned rarely, possibly because
of the nature of the test environment. The environment is a
classical constructed building that is built, furnished and
designed quite traditionally. As such, no elements with
extraordinary dimensions or shapes are present. Geometry and
size might have a more pronounced role when situated in a
Fig. 4. Graph depicting the relation between distance to the decision points and modern and highly developed architectural building. However,
the number of landmarks and their score within that distance. based on this study, it can only be concluded that the role of
shape for indoor landmarks is negligible.
D. Concluding Questionnaire
Coming back to the semantics of an object, the results
The questionnaire revealed that no person consciously indicate that the features of structural and object landmarks are
experienced difficulties with the think aloud method. not sufficient to account for the saliency of about 23 % of the
Furthermore, nine out of eleven test persons stated that a map mentioned objects. Moreover, the semantic component was
would not have simplified or supported the wayfinding process essential in explaining why certain objects were mentioned.
in any way. For example, one of the objects that was described in every
recording is the VTK. The reputation of this student’s union
IV. DISCUSSION attributes a great semantic saliency to this room and explains
why this room and no similar rooms were described as
A. The Description of Landmarks and Related Characteristics frequent. As mentioned earlier, signs and symbols can attribute
additional explicit semantic saliency to an object. In addition to
Common nouns appear to be extremely adequate to
this, many objects are perceived highly semantically salient by
describe a landmark, although one object can be referred to by
observers who are familiar with the environment. The fact that
a wide range of terms. Signs can assign unambiguous names to
the semantic component has to be deducted on the basis of
certain objects and these objects are thus mentioned more
familiarity or its immediate surroundings, namely the various
frequently. This is ascertained by [15] as well. As such, areas
signs, implies that a landmark always has to be examined with
or elements in a building appointed with a sign possess a
respect to its observer and environment, as emphasized by [11].
greater (semantic) saliency. In this way, these objects
Furthermore, the importance of cognitive landmarks, the notion
distinguish themselves from the environment [25].
of explicit semantics and the effect of familiarity are all
To provide in a more detailed description of a chosen incorporated in the landmark theory of [9]. Related to indoor
landmark, color and to a lesser extent material are used in most landmarks, this landmark theory, which stems from outdoor
cases. Although this study indicates that the state of the object research, has never been explicitly refuted, neither specifically
is the most cited feature, the authors share the opinion of [12] confirmed before. These findings support the applicability of
that this is open to interpretation and can cause false this theory indoors.
descriptions. For example, the age of an object is easy to
Elaborating on the difference between structural and object
determine by its date of construction, but the maintenance and
landmarks, according to [7], people have a natural preference
wear can visually misrepresent the age. Therefore, attributions
to remember structural landmarks. However, at first sight, this
like “modern”, “new” and “old” can be out of place. Moreover,
study indicates a more balanced presence of object and
expressions as “beautiful” or “weird” are highly subjective.
structural landmarks. A possible explanation for this apparent
Meanwhile, color and material can contrast stronger with the
discrepancy can be linked to the different test environments.
environment and all participants generally refer to the various
The experiment of [7] took place in a virtual space with a
colors and materials with the same terms, allowing a clear
limited amount of landmarks and a restricted maneuverability
communication. It is thus, according to [12], the most
inducing a very limited field of view for the test persons. On
mentioned objective way to make a detailing possible.
the contrary, the test area in our study is characterized by a
Furthermore, it seems that color is highly appropriate to
large variety of objects and the possibility to look around with
differentiate zones in a building. One of the participants could
fewer visual restrictions. Furthermore, there is a more limited
distinguish a frequented zone from an unfamiliar zone relying
range of structural landmarks in the current testing area
on the red and blue colors of these zones. This is in line with
compared to the number of object landmarks and yet these are
the theorem of Gärling et al. (1983) that colors are essential in
consistently mentioned more by most participants of the
recognizing the various parts of a building and in this way
experiment. In other words, the entire collection of object
substantially contribute to the formation of a cognitive model.
landmarks, which is characterized by a huge variety, is
Note that in the building where this study took place colors are
mentioned equally as much in terms of percentage, but a
often used to differentiate zones, while recent modern buildings
specific object landmark is mentioned much less. This becomes
display a more uniform color pattern. In other words, the use of
evident based on the word analysis, especially with respect to
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 108
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEEstairs. A possible explanation is that the interaction with stairs that give view across an open area very few objects are
is physically perceivable due to the vertical relocation [7] and mentioned.
these elements indicate an increased complexity of the (layout
of the) environment [21]. For example, one of the test persons C. Concluding Remarks
stated that he has an odd preference to describe stairs, but this
This study has some limitations. First of all, the focus lies
study indicates that this is not exceptional. In connection to
on the identification of potential landmarks. In this way,
this, one of the objects that was mentioned by all test persons is
offering an insight on the characteristics of potential
the wooden spiral staircase. Summarizing, it can be stated that
landmarks. It is not clear, however, which landmarks would
structural landmarks were perceived more salient and that this
actually be used in route instructions. Second, some comments
study is in line with the conclusions made by [7].
can be made regarding the use of the think aloud method. It
Finally, various non-persistent elements are cited during the supplies a rich dataset, but demands a very extensive and time
description process. For example, people are often mentioned. consuming analysis. Therefore, the number of participants is
Moreover, these elements were useful, since references like limited. This should not be a problem, since a small test
“here I encountered a good friend” or “we passed those girls as population is considered to be sufficient to draw conclusions
well” contributed to the wayfinding process. The benefits that about the cognitive processes with respect to the performed
non-stationary landmarks can offer are also mentioned by [9]. task [17], [26]. However, coupled with the fact that the think
They adduce that the utility of landmarks can be of longer aloud method brings forth qualitative data, this leads to the
duration than the landmark itself. However, the notion of situation in which no statistical analysis could take place. Some
moving landmarks is contradictious with the required caution is therefore advised in applying these deductions. It is a
persistence of a landmark. Hence, some authors (e.g. [1], [7]) necessity to behold the conclusions in this report first of all as
believe that people are not suitable landmarks. Accordingly, indications and to a lesser extent as proven facts. In order to
these non-persistent elements should not be seen as landmarks, resolve this, the authors are currently investigating the potential
but rather as elements that attribute to the semantic saliency of of other methods (e.g. eye tracking) to provide more adequate
the space where they were encountered. quantitative measures. Finally, more research should be
conducted on which aspects should be annotated by the coding
B. The Location of Indoor Landmarks scheme. The presented coding scheme was composed to
comprise some essential elements – according to the authors –,
A first important finding is that landmarks are most needed
but improvements should be considered.
at locations where a change of orientation takes place, for
example at intersections. This is similar to the findings in
outdoor landmark research (e.g. [10], [13], [15], [16]). As a V. CONCLUSIONS
result, it confirms the importance of landmarks in facilitating This study arose from the belief that there might be
navigation decisions. substantial differences regarding the characteristics and use
between indoor and outdoor landmarks. Starting from this
Furthermore, in comparison to objects that function as
problem statement, two research questions were formulated.
orientation point, there are fewer objects present that are
The first question was how landmarks are best described and
eligible to take on the role of checkpoint. Yet, some authors,
which characteristics are linked to these descriptions. The
including [3], see this latter as a key function of a(n) (indoor)
results indicate that the description of indoor landmarks is most
landmark. A similar phenomenon occurs in a study of [6]:
successful by using the common noun of the object. If a more
participants render less information in secluded paths.
detailed description is needed, this should be supplemented
Moreover, references to landmarks in these segments stop
with the color of the object or the material from which it is
completely. Probably because every new direction or corridor
made. Second, there was no doubt that landmarks are of great
segment is accompanied with new distinct objects, while less
importance during navigation and wayfinding, especially in
new objects are found towards the end. After all, the location of
unfamiliar buildings, but some confusion existed concerning
a landmark is related to the availability of landmarks in the
the main function of these navigational aids. This study
environment [6]. Additionally, it is feasible to think of paths in
demonstrates that indoor landmarks primarily function as
an indoor environment as tunnels, as indicated by one of the
orientation points since these objects supply information on
test persons, whereby no confusion is possible about the
points where decisions have to be made concerning the
remainder of the route once one has entered a certain corridor.
remainder of the route or where the orientation of the navigator
This could indicate that landmarks as checkpoint only play a
changes. Furthermore, there is strong tendency to neglect
very moderate role indoor, because pedestrians are in general
distant landmarks in favor of objects near the observer. In
more restrained to the indoor network, characterized by narrow
addition, the characteristics of the described objects verify that
corridors and a limited field of view, in comparison to a more
the landmark theory of [9] is applicable indoor. Thus, the
open outdoor network.
selection of indoor landmarks is made on the basis of visual,
Finally, it is noted that the majority of the described structural and semantic properties. In sum, by placing some
landmarks are located close to the observer. This is fully landmark aspects related to location and description in an
concordant with outdoor research (e.g. [6], [10]). Distant indoor context, this paper has contributed to the formulation of
objects seem to be less satisfactory as landmarks both indoors adequate route instructions. By doing so, the authors hope to
as outdoors. This is reinforced in indoor spaces by the have contributed to the further integration of landmarks in
restricted field of view on most locations, but even at windows route instructions in support of indoor navigation.
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 109
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEEFUTURE WORK [12] M. Raubal and S. Winter, “Enriching Wayfinding Instructions with
Local Landmarks,” in Geographic Information Science. Second
As mentioned in section 4.1, the type of building might International Conference, GIScience 2002, 2002, pp. 243–259.
have an impact on the identification of landmarks and their
[13] P. Michon and M. Denis, “When and Why Are Visual Landmarks Used
description. For that reason, similar experiments should be in Giving Directions(cid:3031)?,” in Spatial information theory. Cognitive and
performed in different types of buildings (e.g. modern, old- Computional Foundations of Geographic Information Science, 2001, pp.
time). 292–305.
[14] Z. Fang, Q. Li, X. Zhang, and S. Shaw, “A GIS data model for
landmark-based pedestrian navigation,” Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., vol. 26,
ACKNOWLEDGMENT no. 5, pp. 1–22, May 2011.
We are grateful to M. Coryn, who provided detailed floor [15] A. Tom and M. Denis, “Referring to Landmark or Street Information in
Route Directions: What Difference Does it Make?,” in Spatial
plans of the building in which our experiment was conducted.
information theory. Foundations of Geographic Information Science,
2003, vol. 2, pp. 362–374.
REFERENCES [16] B. Elias, “Determination of Landmarks and Reliability Criteria for
Landmarks,” in Fifth workshop on progress in Automated Map
[1] A. M. A. Millonig and K. S. K. Schechtner, “Developing Landmark- Generalization Paris, 2003, pp. 1–12.
Based Pedestrian-Navigation Systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
[17] M. W. M. Jaspers, “A comparison of usability methods for testing
Syst., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 43–49, 2007.
interactive health technologies: methodological aspects and empirical
[2] M. Soeda, N. Kushiyama, and R. Ohno, “Wayfinding in Cases with evidence.,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 78, no. 5, pp. 340–353, May 2009.
Vertical Motion,” Proc. MERA 97 Int. Conf. Environ. Stud., pp. 559 –
[18] E. Krahmer and N. Ummelen, “Thinking About Thinking Aloud - A
564, 1997.
comparison of two verbal protocols for usability testing,” IEEE Trans.
[3] B. Brunner-Friedrich and V. Radoczky, “Active Landmarks in Indoor Prof. Commun., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 105–117, 2004.
Environments,” in Visual Information and Information Systems, 2006,
[19] C. P. J. M. van Elzakker, The Use Of Maps In The Exploration Of
pp. 203–215.
Geographic Data. Utrecht/Enschede: Koninklijk Nederlands
[4] T. Gärling, E. Lindberg, and T. Mäntylä, “Orientation in buildings: aardrijkskundig genootschap, Faculteit geowetenschappen, Universiteit
effects of familiarity, visual access, and orientation aids.,” J. Appl. Utrecht / Internationaal Instituut voor Geo-Information Science and
Psychol., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 177–186, 1983. Earth observation, 2004.
[5] A. W. Siegel and S. H. White, “The development of spatial
[20] J. Frankenstein, S. Brüssow, F. Ruzzoli, and C. Hölscher, “The language
representations of large scale environments,” in Advances in child
of landmarks: the role of background knowledge in indoor wayfinding,”
development and behaviour, vol. 10, H. W. Reese, Ed. New York, New Cogn. Process., vol. 13, no. S1, pp. 165–170, Aug. 2012.
York, USA: Academic Press, 1975, pp. 9–55.
[21] C. Hölscher, T. Meilinger, G. Vrachliotis, M. Brösamle, and M. Knauff,
[6] K. L. Lovelace, M. Hegarty, and D. R. Montello, “Elements of Good
“Up the down staircase: Wayfinding strategies in multi-level buildings,”
Route Directions in Familiar and Unfamiliar Environments,” in Spatial J. Environ. Psychol., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 284–299, Dec. 2006.
information theory. Cognitive and Computional Foundations of
[22] L. T. Sarjakoski, P. Kettunen, H.-M. Flink, M. Laakso, M. Rönneberg,
Geographic Information Science, 1999, pp. 65–82.
and T. Sarjakoski, “Analysis of verbal route descriptions and landmarks
[7] B. J. Stankiewicz and A. A. Kalia, “Acquisition of structural versus for hiking,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1001–1011,
object landmark knowledge.,” J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform., Sep. 2011.
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 378–390, May 2007.
[23] K. Rehrl, S. Leitinger, G. Gartner, F. Ortag, J. H. Iii, and A.- Salzburg,
[8] K. Lynch, “The city image and its elements,” in The City Reader, R. T. “An Analysis of Direction and Motion Concepts in Verbal Descriptions
LeGates and F. Stout, Eds. London, England: Routledge, 1960, pp. 98– of Route Choices,” in COSIT, 2009, pp. 471–488.
102.
[24] B. Hellwig, D. Van Uytvanck, M. Hulsbosch, and A. Somasundarasm,
[9] M. Sorrows and S. Hirtle, “The nature of landmarks for real and ELAN - Linguistic Annotator version 4.0.0 – manual. Nijmegen, The
electronic spaces,” in Spatial information theory. Cognitive and Netherlands: Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, The Language
Computional Foundations of Geographic Information Science, 1999, Archive, 2010.
vol. 1661, pp. 37–50.
[25] M. Raubal, “Human wayfinding in unfamiliar buildings: A simulation
[10] D. Caduff and S. Timpf, “The Landmark Spider: Representing with a cognizing agent,” Cogn. Process., vol. 2, no. 2–3, pp. 363–388,
Landmark Knowledge for Wayfinding Tasks,” in AAAI Spring 2001.
Symposium, 2002.
[26] A. Gill and B. Nonnecke, “Think aloud: effects and validity,” in
[11] D. Caduff and S. Timpf, “On the assessment of landmark salience for Proceedings of the 30th ACM international, 2012, pp. 31–35.
human navigation.,” Cogn. Process., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 249–67, Dec.
2008.
U PINLBS 2014, Corpus Christi, Texas, Nov 20-21, 2014 110
978-1-4799-6004-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE