An Augmented Reality Exhibition Guide for the iPhone
Mohamed Ashraf Nassar, Fatma Meawad
German University in Cairo
mohamed.nassar@alumni2009.guc.edu.eg, fatma.meawad@guc.edu.eg
Abstract background that supports our subsequent design
decisions. With a clear description of the system
Handheld Augmented Reality (AR) can enable requirements and its essential success criteria, we
intuitive browsing and annotation of objects in an discuss a simple scenario on a prototype of our
exhibition through the visitors’ in-hand mobile proposed design. Based on some experimental results
devices. Several researchers explored Handheld AR of testing the prototype in different scenarios, we
technologies in museums and exhibition-like highlight some future directions for this on-going
environments. However, despite the proliferation of work.
smart phones that can act as magic lenses for
augmented objects, AR technologies are not widely 2. Tracking Techniques
adopted in exhibitions. This paper investigates the
possible techniques to build a reliable, scalable and Choosing a tracking technique for an Augmented
cost effective solution for an indoor marker based Reality application is an important design decision.
exhibition guide on the iPhone. After reviewing Such choice can either cause or resolve many
possible tracking technologies, available open challenges for the application. For example, reliable
source marker based tracking toolkits on the iPhone and accurate solutions might come with a
are explored. The paper concludes with a proposed compromise of usability and performance.
design for dynamic content creation to augment and Additionally, using a free tracking toolkit,
annotate exhibition objects. purchasing one or building one from scratch would
impact reliability, performance and the expected cost
1. Introduction of the whole solution. We aim to present a solution
that combines the benefits of usability, reliability and
Augmented reality has become a rich field of cost effectiveness, in order to achieve wide adoption.
research in recent years, so have the technologies In this section, we give an overview of existing
enabling it to become widely used. Smart phones, for tracking techniques and their suitability for our main
example, with their growing capabilities, built-in goal.
sensors and wide spread represent one of these
enabling technologies. Much research has been 2.1. Indoors Location Based Tracking (LBT)
carried out on how handheld augmented reality can
be used to enhance user experience in museums, Despite the wide success of Global positioning
exhibitions or in other indoor environments. Some system (GPS) with location based mobile
research attempted to contextually overlay 3D applications in outdoor settings, GPS does not
characters on the mobile screen to interact with users provide the required accuracy indoors. Alternately,
and guide them in the environment [18]. Others used various approaches were used for indoor location
games to get many users to interact and enjoy a tour based tracking, either through the use of Infra-Red
inside a building [14]. However, existing attempts in (IR) networks [1], Wireless-LAN (Wi-Fi) networks
indoor environments are merely prototypes that for triangulating the location [2] or active Radio
cannot be easily adopted in real life contexts. Frequency Identification (RFID) tags [8]. The
The aim of this work is to provide an existing solutions for indoors location based tracking
augmented reality application on the iPhone to allow require expensive infrastructure without a guarantee
exhibitions’ visitors to enjoy access to dynamic of an acceptable level of accuracy for an AR
information about the displayed items and share their application [8].
own comments if they please. Enabling these forms
of interactions in a reliable, yet seamless manner is 2.2. Marker-less Tracking
envisaged to promote wide adoption of the
technology in any indoor exhibition. Marker-less tracking, or feature tracking does not
Tracking techniques are the biggest challenge to require special markers to be introduced in the
the usability of an AR client on mobile devices. application setting. It is based purely on computer
Thus, we start this paper with a discussion of vision algorithms extracting the specific required
existing tracking techniques to give a basic features from the incoming camera feed, forexample, faces, buildings, objects, etc. Mobile based 2.3.2. 2D Barcodes
feature tracking is gaining more attention as the
processing power of current smart phones increases 2D Barcodes are gaining more popularity as fiducial
to allow it [12, 4]. markers. The ISO standard Data Matrix barcode (see
Even though, the concept behind marker-less figure 1(b)) can store up to 2KB of information [16].
tracking could provide the ultimate augmented However, in environments where only little
reality experience for users, both indoors and information needs to be encoded, simpler markers
outdoors, there are some major challenges for this are preferred. For example frame, split, BCH (Bose,
approach that hinder its adoption, especially with Ray-Chaudhuri & Hocquenghem) (see figure 1(d))
mobile based applications. The machine learning and Standard markers (see figure 1(c)). These
techniques used for feature detection demand high markers can be used for an ID-aware environments
processing powers and advanced memory where the ID number is encoded as bits in the marker
requirements. Scalability is another challenge for this itself. There are several benefits to such approach.
approach since complex algorithms need to be Firstly, detection of ID-markers is always faster than
developed for learning different features. Finally, for template-markers since no image matching is
marker-less tracking can be severely crippled in required [6]. Secondly, the user does not have to
mono-vision applications that use a single camera, provide marker images, but can freely choose any
due to the difficulty in depth perception [10]. marker from a fixed set of patterns. Finally, in
contrast to template markers, the user is not required
2.3. Marker-based Tracking to train the toolkits with new patterns since any valid
marker is implicitly known to the system [17]. Frame
Markers, also known as Fiducials, are symbols with and Split markers offer an extra benefit of enabling
specific known patterns that are designed to be easily human understandable information in addition to the
recognized by machines [11, 6]. The maker-based encoded ID. However, they are only supported by a
technique is the most commonly used indoor few toolkits of which none is available for licensing.
tracking technology. This is because it relies on Section 2.4 provides more details about BCH and
relatively simple software algorithms that do not Standard ID markers.
require high processing powers nor expensive special
built-in sensors. The following subsections provide
an overview of some of the most common types of
markers: template, 2D Barcodes and topological
markers.
2.3.1. Template Markers
( Ma)
a
rA
k
eT r.e mplate ( Mb)
a
rD ka et ra Matrix ( Ic D) MA aS rt ka en rd ard ( Md)
a
rA
k
eB
r
CH ID
Figure 1. Several Types of Markers used in marker based
Template markers are one of the earliest fiducial tracking.
markers developed. Template markers are basically a
square with a black or white border with a 2.3.3. Topological markers
contrasting background (white/black respectively)
that can have anything inside of it. The whole square Topology based markers, such as D-Touch [6], are a
with the pattern inside it are recognized as a marker, class of markers that are recognized based on
(see figure 1(a)). Being a first however, template topological features of the markers rather than their
markers suffer from some drawbacks. Firstly, when a geometry. Marker recognition is not based on shape,
marker is detected, its pattern is extracted and cross- but on the relationship of dark and light regions. As a
correlated with all known patterns. Consequently, as consequence, the visual design of the markers is less
the patterns used increase and as the markers in the constrained and can be governed by aesthetic
input image increase, the application becomes slower principles. That’s form and function, rather than just
[6, 17]. Secondly, template markers must first be function. This is their distinctive feature compared to
designed and then trained for the toolkit to use them. similar systems. The markers can be visually
Finally, the complexity of the marker pattern affects designed to convey meaning to people [5].
the efficiency of the tracking, where patterns with Topological markers seem as good candidates for our
large black and white regions (i.e. low frequency application context since they allows the usage of
patterns) are the most effective [3]. Template markers with better aesthetic qualities. Their main
markers were originally developed for the drawback however is that each marker must be
ARToolKit [9] and currently supported by the independently and uniquely designed and validated.
ARToolKitPlus [17] and Studierstube ES [15]. This requirement would incur additional effort, cost
and time on initial deployment and on scalability, as
in the case of template markers.2.4. Toolkits 3. System Design Considerations
An augmented reality toolkit is a software library Exhibitions are information rich environments that
that can be used to calculate camera position and can vastly vary in their settings. We target indoor
orientation relative to physical markers in real time. environments where exhibits can change frequently
We are interested in open source toolkits that can and are not tied to a specific location. Thus, the
demonstrate an acceptable performance on a mobile deployment of our system with minimal effort and
device and that is either compatible with or can be cost is an essential requirement for our solution.
ported to the iPhone platform. Existing literature Such requirement rules out the use of indoor location
introduced several non-commercial marker based based tracking and marker less tracking techniques
toolkits for augmented reality, for example, for our solution, leaving us with marker based
ARTag[7], Studierstube ES [13] and ARToolKitPlus tracking as the best suit for our solution.
[17]. Studierstube ES has been written from scratch Our proposed system is based on a client server
with high performance for PCs as well as mobile architecture, where the marker identification is done
phones in mind. It is about twice as fast as on the mobile device (client), and the ID is sent to a
ARToolkitPlus on mobile devices and supports many database server to query for information about the
different marker types [13]. However, Studierstube displayed item. Figure 2 presents a typical usage
ES is a closed source library and is not currently scenario; the user points the iPhone at the augmented
being licensed. ARTag library was announced to be object (the Porsche Poster in this case). Since the
unavailable for use by its author, Mark Fiala, despite information is stored in a database, dynamically
its benefits over other similar toolkits, for example: updating the information, adding new ID’s, or even
its edge-based detection algorithm that make it both changing the information associated with a certain
lightning and occlusion immune [7]. ID can be done quickly and independently from the
ARToolkitPlus is the predecessor of rest of the system. This, in addition to the fact that
Studierstube; it is an extended version of the original deploying printed black and white markers is quick
ARToolKit’s vision code that was built to suit the and inexpensive, simplifies dynamic content
needs of mobile devices. ARToolkitPlus has several generation and association with the exhibited items.
additional features over the original ARToolkit. Most
important of which are: Firstly, the support for
mobile devices pixel formats such as RGB565. This
allows image processing on the native pixel formats
of the devices instead of incurring a penalty for
converting to other formats. Secondly, it is based on
fixed point arithmetic operations. This speeds it up
considerably since mobile devices usually do not
have a dedicated hardware floating point unit.
Finally, it supports automatic thresholding and
vignetting that compensate for the sometimes low
resolution and the distortion of mobile device
cameras.
Figure 2: A typical scenario for an exhibition visitor who
ARToolkitPlus offers two types of ID points the iPhone to the displayed item to browse related
markers. Standard ID markers (STD ID), also known information.
as simple ID, use simple four-fold redundancy and
encode 9 bits in a 6x6 pattern. The second type of ID Data retrieval and display on mobile devices is a
markers is the BCH, this type uses cyclic redundancy major usability consideration. The client application
checks (CRC) which require less redundancy for on the mobile should handle the intuitive browsing
similar robustness. BCH markers can therefore store of information about a recognized item. Moreover,
12 bits in the 6x6 pattern image. ARToolkitPlus the client application should allow visitors to share
supports up to 512 STD ID markers and 4096 BCH their comments on the items they are seeing. Finally,
markers. As mentioned earlier, ID markers have the it is important to target the visitors’ in-hand mobile
benefit that they encode the ID within the marker so device instead of offering special devices at the
there is no speed penalty incurred when using a large beginning of their visit. This solution is not only
number of markers. Consequently, ID markers stand cheaper, but also ensures the users’ familiarity with
out as the right choice of makers for this work. the devices.Type Marker MRR MRR
Size At Angle: 90 At angle:
degrees 45 degrees
(Straight)
STD Small 55 cm 40 cm
ID Medium 126 cm 85 cm
Large 300 cm 198 cm
BCH Small 72 cm 56 cm
Medium 187.5 cm 100 cm
Large 300+ cm 247 cm
(a) Object identified (b) Details, reviews and ratings
Table 1: A Table showing the results of measuring the
maximum robust range (MRR) in different scenarios.
4. Experiments
The proposed system is aimed at exhibition visitors
who are assumed to have no technical background.
Hence we put the following criteria that our system
needs to fulfill. The first and most important is the
recognition accuracy. The system needs to be able to
(c) Enter review (d) User Preferences
recognize markers correctly at a comfortable
distance to the user. Secondly, the system must be
Figure 3: Snapshots from the iPhone Mobile client fast in detection. Thirdly, it needs to be robust in the
sense that it does not exhibit jittering or false
A prototype was built using ARToolkitPlus on the recognition.
iPhone to test our envisaged solution. Our choice of
the iPhone stems from its wide adoption worldwide 4.1. Setup
[19]. Figure 3 shows several snapshots from our
iPhone mobile client. The client application running For the purpose of our experiment, the two types of
ARToolKitPlus, detects and decodes the marker, ID markers used by ARToolKitPlus are tested: STD
then queries the server with the marker ID and ID and BCH. We are interested in the maximum
retrieves the information over WiFi. The iPhone robust range (MRR) at which the marker is correctly
screen, as shown figure 3(a), displays the recognized and is tolerant to smooth medium speed
information on a transparent white panel that fades in movements. We will measure the MRR for both the
when a marker is detected and fades out when no BCH and STD ID markers with three different
marker is detected. Additionally, the panel can be marker sizes: small (2.5x2.5 cm), medium (6x6 cm)
fixed at the top or button according to user and large (13x13 cm). Lightning conditions are
preference. The panel is easily scrollable and reminiscent of typical indoor lightning and are
expandable to show more details about an object, or constant throughout different trials. This is an
to show existing reviews and ratings on this specific acceptable setting since lightning can, in most cases,
item (see figure 3(b)). The user can choose to enter be easily controlled indoors.
ratings and reviews. Additionally, the user can Each marker is fixed perfectly flat to the bottom
personalize the interface through the display settings right corner of a poster. Such arrangement is chosen
(see figure 3(d)). Entering data in such panel is to mimic a painting displayed in a museum or gallery
relatively simple for an iPhone user. The use of a as an example exhibition setting. Then, the
fixed panel was initially a fast prototyping decision. experimenter moves further away from the marker
Then, it was found to combine good aesthetics with till a MRR is reached and then it is measured. This
good usability. The iPhone here acts as a “magic- step is repeated for each size of each type of the
lens”, where the user holds the device and perceives markers and from two different angles: 90 degrees
the physical exhibition and the augmented and 45 degrees to the marker. The process is
information through the iPhone screen. conducted using two different generations of the
iPhone the 3G and the 3GS models.4.2. Observations different sizes of the markers used. Plus, there are no
restrictions on the marker size chosen for printing
Table 1 shows the measured MRR for each marker which allows for a great deal of flexibility for setting
type, size and angle using the iPhone 3G. The table up the exhibition. For example a small art gallery
clearly shows that BCH markers tend to offer more may choose to use medium sized markers because its
overall reliability and robustness than STD ID visitors tend to move around the paintings in a 2
markers. They are recognized more quickly and their meter radius for example. While a big museum may
MRR is larger than the STD ID in all cases. This is use very large markers to augment a huge statue and
probably due to the CRC error correction embedded allow viewing it from a larger distance.
in the BCH markers as discussed earlier in section
2.4. Thus, we interpret the results taking the BCH as 5.1. Challenges
a point of reference since it represents the best
measurement. Using marker based tracking has its limitations.
The small markers only offer an MRR of up Markers can be intrusive in an exhibition’s
to 72 cm when facing the markers and up to 56 cm environment. Our approach offers flexibility in the
when viewing them from an angle. This restricts the choice of the size. Such control allows the organizer
movements of the users in this small distance. The of an exhibition to place the markers in the least
user has to be too close to the item. With such intrusive manner according to the application
measurements, small markers can be suitable for context. Another potential limitation is that the
smaller objects/pieces of art that cannot be viewed number of possible markers is limited (4096 in case
from a distance. Naturally, the medium sized of ARToolkitPlus BCH markers). This limits the
markers showed better MRR measurements than the number of objects that could be augmented if the
small ones due to their size advantage. Offering up to target exhibition is really large. Although
approximately two meters in a direct view and up to ARToolKitPlus is open source, increasing the
one meter from an angle of 45 degrees provides a number of markers is not an option since this
comfortable range for users to move around an requires changing the encoding/decoding algorithms
exhibit item. Their slightly bigger size makes them of the BCH markers themselves. This is roughly
more obtrusive than their smaller counterparts; equivalent to writing our own library from scratch.
however they offer a good compromise between Finally, when augmenting a large piece, one
obtrusiveness and MRR in many cases. Finally, the marker may not be enough. Picture the scenario
large markers are recognized in distances greater where a user is standing in front of a painting
than three meters. This makes them ideal when spanning an entire wall, either he/she will back up
trying to augment a large item or when requiring until the whole painting is in his field of vision, or
augmentation from large distances. However, they he/she will stand up close and observe each part
are even more obtrusive than the medium sized separately. In the first case we might need to use a
markers. The overall results of both the iPhone 3G larger marker in order for it to be recognized from a
and 3Gs are similar. The only notable difference is in larger distance. In the second case we might need to
the speed of launching the application where it is place several markers so that recognition is preserved
faster on the 3Gs model. wherever the user looks. A similar problem arises
when augmenting a 3D piece like a vase for
5. Discussion example; a marker is only tracked when it is in view,
so if the user moves about the piece, the
We have presented an on-going work towards an augmentation is lost. A solution for this would be to
interactive handheld augmented reality system for use four markers on the four sides of the object.
enhancing the experience for exhibitions’ visitors However, this may be obtrusive and unwanted in
and to promote wide adoption of the technology. We some applications. In this case we might provide an
emphasized several criteria as the success factors for option for the user to lock on a specific marker ID so
our proposed system: usability, reliability, scalability that the information associated with that ID is visible
and cost effectiveness. We presented a prototype of even if the user moves around.
our system using the iPhone platform as an example One major technical challenge that we faced
of current smart phones. We favored the marker while building the prototype is getting a camera feed
based approach over other tracking techniques due to on the iPhone. The iPhone SDK does not allow
its relative simplicity, ease of deployment and cost direct camera access. Thus, we decided to program
effectiveness. the phone to snap periodic frames in order to search
Our proposed system is based on a client them for markers. However, this proved inefficient
server architecture, where the marker identification is because the iPhone camera takes about 1.5-2.5
done on the mobile device (client), while data seconds (iPhone 3G) or 1-2 seconds (iPhone 3GS) to
storage and management takes place on a server. Our capture a photo, which makes the program jittery.
experimental results were promising for the three Plus, the camera capture is done in the main thread,suspending the application until it completes. As a [6] E. Costanza and J. Huang. Designable visual markers.
workaround, we programmed the phone to take a In CHI ’09: Proceedings of the 27th international
self-snap (a snapshot of its own display) instead. The conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages
1879–1888, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
self-snap is done in a separate thread so it does not
[7] M. Fiala. Artagrev2 fiducialmarker system: Vision-
impact performance, and is sufficiently fast to allow
based tracking for ar, In ISMAR (October 2005)
us to take up to 5 pictures per second on the iPhone
[8] J. Hightower and G. Borriello. A survey and taxonomy
3G. This enables real-time perception for the user.
of location systems for ubiquitous computing. Computer,
The result image from each snap is a 480 * 320 pixel Vol. 34, No. 8. (07 Aug 2001), pp. 57-66.
(which is the iPhone screen resolution) bitmap [9] H. Kato and M. Billinghurst. Marker tracking and hmd
image. The raw image bytes are then extracted and calibration for a video-based augmented reality
fed into the vision code of ARToolKitPlus. The color conferencing system. Augmented Reality, International
space of the toolkit is set to BGRA (Blue, Green, Workshop on, 0:85–94, 1999.
[10] J. M. V. Misker and J. Ster. Authoring immersive
Red, Alpha) in order to allow fast processing at the
mixed reality experiences. In E. Dubois, P. Gray, and L.
native capture format and color space.
Nigay, editors, The Engineering of
Mixed Reality Systems, chapter 14, pages 275–291.
5.2. What is Next?
Springer London, London, 2010.
[11] C. Owen, F. Xiao, and P. Middlin. What is the best
The work described in this paper is a work in- fiducial? In Augmented Reality Toolkit, the First IEEE
progress. Hence, we conclude by highlighting our International Workshop, 2002.
next steps: [12] B. Ruf, E. Kokiopoulou, and M. Detyniecki. Mobile
museum guide based on fast sift recognition. In 6th
International Workshop on Adaptive Multimedia Retrieval,
• Finalizing the prototype to add intelligent
2008.
recommendations to the visitor based on
[13] D. Schmalstieg, A. Fuhrmann, G. Hesina, Z.
viewed pieces and ratings.
Szalav´ari, L. M. Encarnac, M. Gervautz, and W.
• Adding support for multi-marker tracking is Purgathofer. The studierstube augmented reality project.
another point that should be taken in Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
consideration. Currently, if two markers are 11(1):33–54, February 2002.
recognized by the application, the one with [14] D. Schmalstieg and D. Wagner. A handheld
the highest confidence will have augmented reality museum guide. In International
Conference Mobile Learning. IADIS, 2005.
precedence. In case both markers achieve
[15] D. Schmalstieg and D.Wagner. Experiences with
the same confidence, the user should have
handheld augmented reality. In 2007 6th IEEE and ACM
the choice which identified object to be in
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
focus.
Reality, pages 1–13, Washington, DC, USA, November
• Conducting a variety of usability tests with 2007. IEEE.
many users in real life conditions in an [16] D. Wagner, T. Langlotz, and D. Schmalstieg. Robust
information rich environment. Such tests and unobtrusive marker tracking on mobile phones. In
will help ensure a great level of usability ISMAR ’08: Proceedings of the 7th IEEE/ACM
and high acceptance of the application. International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality, volume 0, pages 121–124, Washington, DC, USA,
2008. IEEE Computer Society.
6. REFERENCES
[17] D. Wagner and D. Schmalstieg. Artoolkitplus for pose
tracking on mobile devices. Technical report, Institute for
[1] Roy Want, Bill N. Schilit, Norman I. Adams, Rich Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of
Gold, Karin Pedersen, David Goldberg, John R. Ellis, and Technology, February 2007.
Mark Weiser. The ParcTab ubiquitous computing [18] R. Wojciechowski, K. Walczak, M. White, and W.
experiment. IEEE Personal Communications, 2:28-43, 0. Cellary. Building virtual and augmented reality museum
[2] P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan. Radar: an in-building exhibitions. In Web3D ’04: Proceedings of the ninth
rf-based user location and tracking system. In Proceedings international conference on 3D Web technology, pages
IEEE INFOCOM 2000. Conference on Computer 135–144, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM
Communications. Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of [19] Gartner. Worldwide mobile phone sales 2009.
the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies (Cat. http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1306513
No.00CH37064), volume 2, pages 775–784. IEEE, 2000.
[3] Artoolkit documentation,
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/artoolkit/documentation/d
evmulti.htm.
[4] E. Bruns, B. Brombach, and O. Bimber. Mobile phone-
enabled museum guidance with adaptive classification.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 28(4):98–102,
2008.
[5] E. Costanza. Telling a story on a tag: the importance of
markers’ visual design for real world applications. In
Mobile Interaction with the Real World (MIRW), 2006.