Towards a location model for indoor navigation support
through public displays and mobile devices
Christian Kray Keith Cheverst Michael Harrison, Fathi
School of Computing Science Computing Department Hamhoum, Jürgen Wagner
Newcastle University, Lancaster University School of Computing Science
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Lancaster, UK Newcastle University,
c.kray@ncl.ac.uk kc@comp.lancs.ac.uk Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
{michael.harrison,f.a.hamhoum
,jurgen.wagner}@ncl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT to the receptionist’s desk displaying the helpful message: ”Need
Directions?” He interacts with the console, and selects Keith’s
Indoor navigation differs from outdoor navigation in several
name from the displayed list. The system then offers to provide
significant ways. In particular, precise localization usually
personalized guidance if he’s willing to identify his phone’s
requires an expensive infrastructure whereas outdoors, GPS offers
Bluetooth name. David recognizes the Bluetooth name of his
an inexpensive and widely available solution. In addition, indoor
phone on the list being displayed, selects it and a small
environments frequently include several floors and can be
application is sent to his phone. The Hermes II navigation system
relatively complex and thus difficult to navigate for people
then asks him to ’follow the arrows that will appear on office door
unfamiliar with such buildings. In this paper, we investigate
displays on route to the target destination’. The system also points
requirements and constraints applicable to a location model to
out that he can interact with the office door displays if he wishes
support indoor navigation. We introduce an initial location model
to view a map showing his current position within InfoLab21 and
and evaluate its use in the context of a deployed public display
the route he is taking to Keith’s office. As he walks through the
network (Hermes II). These displays function as dynamic signage
building he notices that even displays that seem to be showing
to support indoor navigation and can be combined with mobile
some other information change to displaying direction arrows for
devices to improve navigation.
him as he approaches. Halfway to Keith’s office, he spots two
guys in discussion and thinks one of them might be Keith. As he
Keywords
walks up to them, he realizes that he was wrong – neither of them
Location model, public displays, mobile devices, indoor is Keith. At the same time his phone vibrates. When David takes it
navigation. out he sees a message telling him that he went the wrong way and
should trace back his steps until he finds another public display.
1. INTRODUCTION
A suitable location model is the first step towards realizing such a
When navigating indoor spaces, people typically use traditional scenario - one that can automatically generate both generic and
static signage to help them find their intended destination. At personalized guidance information for use on public displays and
certain events, such as trade-fairs (CEBIT being a good example), mobile devices. In this paper, we identify requirements for such a
attendees may be able to use mobile devices, such as WaveLan model, introduce an initial location model and evaluate it in the
equipped PDAs, to help them navigate. context of a deployed public display network. In the following,
we first briefly review related work and then identify key
However, an alternative and complimentary way to support
requirements that a suitable location model would have to meet.
pedestrians in their navigation of indoor areas is to utilise public
Subsequently, we introduce an initial model and then evaluate it
digital displays, which are increasingly prevalent in places such as
against the identified requirements. The conclusion summarizes
public transport hubs, airports and conference centers. Content
our main contributions and highlights some further work that we
for such dynamic signage is usually manually created and/or pre-
intend to undertake in the future.
defined, which requires significant effort prior to setting
deployment or when updating the content. In addition, providing
personalized guidance is very difficult with manually created 2. RELATED WORK
(static) content even though dynamic signage systems are, in In the field of Ubiquitous Computing there has been much work
principle, well suited for such a use. The same is true for the use on location technologies – this work has variously considered
of mobile devices in such settings. Consider this g scenario: technologies based on RF/Utrasound, IR etc. Additionally, a
significant number of location and context models have been
David, a new postgraduate student has a meeting with his new
proposed for a variety of applications in mobile in ubiquitous
supervisor Keith. David has never been to the InfoLab21 building
computing (see [Baus, 2002] and [Satoh, 2007] for an overview).
before, and is running a little late for his meeting. On entering
When the location of persons is at issue then privacy is clearly an
InfoLab21 David observes that the lady at reception is busy
important factor and much research has tackled this obdurate
helping another visitor but he notices a touch screen console next
problem. There has also been important early work identifying therelationship between the location/context models and the level of InfoLab21 itself has four floors (labeled A-D) connected to a
individual privacy that can be supported, e.g. [Spreitzer, 1993]. number of staircases and elevators. Seen from the top, its overall
layout is roughly F-shaped. Signage in the building is based on a
In terms of supporting the production of geometric location
few large signs at the entrance points to each floor (e.g. elevators,
models for use in location aware applications, YAMAMOTO
stairwells). The signs list the departments and facilities on each
[Stahl, 2006] (Yet Another Map Modelling Tool) is a highly
floor, such as “Computing Department”. After the large signs
advanced tool, which incorporates a detailed GUI for editing and
there are no intermediate signs, e.g. “Offices 12 to 20 this way”.
producing a 3-dimensional location model.
Each room has an ID, indicated on a small black and white
There are a number of indoor navigation systems that use either doorplate (see figure 1 below). Room IDs are composed of a letter
public displays, or mobile devices, or a combination thereof. indicating the floor, and a one or two digit room number, e.g.
Cyberguide [Abowd, 1997] was an early example system using C40. Access to some areas requires an access card..
Infrared (IR) beacons and sensors (for room-level granularity
location sensing) in combination with a simple map-based The door displays are clearly situated at specific points within the
location model for indoor navigation. infoLab21 building and with specific orientations, e.g. some may
point North, others East etc. Clearly such orientations have
3. IDENTIFYING REQUIREMENTS important implications for the display of navigation information,
e.g. a display facing North might be unsuitable for presenting a
In order to develop a location model that is well suited for
visual only navigation instruction to a visitor heading North.
supporting indoor navigation through public displays and mobile
Consequently, an important requirement on our location model is
devices, several requirements have to be met. These include some
that is support the representation of the orientations (and position)
of a general nature resulting from the application itself (i.e.
of the door display infrastructure.
navigation), some more specific ones introduced by the particular
domain (i.e. the use of dynamic signage) and some technological
3.2 General requirements
constraints (i.e. resulting from the type and cost of different
positioning technologies). Becker and Dürr [Becker, 2005] In order to provide navigation assistance, a system has to be able
discuss a number of requirements for a generic location model in to compute a route to the destination specified by a user.
ubiquitous computing. Some of these apply in our context as well Therefore, the location model has to support the application of
while others are less relevant, and still further ones are particular wayfinding algorithms such as A* or Djikstra’s algorithm.
to our application scenario.
In addition, it is highly desirable for a location model to be easily
integrated with the format used to represent the environment.
3.1 Deployment considerations
Ideally, it should be possible to (semi-) automatically derive data
Our long-term goal is to design, implement and evaluate an for the location model from the environmental representation
application that realizes the scenario presented in section 1 within format. For example, if the world is represented by 2D maps, the
InfoLab21 using the Hermes II office door display. This system location model used for navigation should be ‘compatible’ with
has been deployed on two floors in InfoLab21, a modern office those maps, e.g. be in the form of 2D coordinates.
building at Lancaster University. The forty displays are mounted
A further highly desirable property for a location model is the
outside offices and run an interactive application which builds on
ability to encode orientation [Becker, 2005]. A significant number
the functionality of the Hermes I system described in [Cheverst,
of ways to convey directions rely on this information such as
2003]. Displays comprise a 7” colour touchscreen, a camera and
arrows or verbal instructions. While it is possible to relay
Bluetooth connectivity. In [Kray, 2006] we describe a study in
guidance without information about orientation – for example,
which we explored the extent to which owners of door displays
using an overview map with a highlighted route – the lack of this
would be prepared to have their display show arrows in order to
information would significantly limit the vocabulary of a system.
support visitor navigation. In summary, we found that owners
were prepared to support such navigation but only if appropriate Finally, any location model should only be as complex as
control was supported, i.e. enabling owners to specify necessary (in order to facilitate its practical use) while at the same
circumstances in which important/timely information showing on time being computationally manageable [Becker, 2005].
their door display could not be overridden.
3.3 Domain-specific requirements
Buildings are environments, which are structured in particular
ways, which should be reflected in a location model. In particular,
there are frequently multiple floors connected through staircases,
elevators and escalators. Hence, a model needs to incorporate a
notion of three-dimensionality (or at least 2.5D) in order to be able
to cope with multi-level buildings.
Indoor spaces inside larger buildings are also frequently
subdivided spatially (e.g. in terms of wings, corridors, rooms) and
logically (e.g. in terms of departments, organizational and/or
functional units). Ideally, a location model should take these
aspects into account – [Becker, 2005] in order to enable a system
Figure 1. Typical corridor in InfoLab21 showing offices with to refer to these entities and to resolve references to them.
associated door displays (highlighted).Two prominent representation formats for buildings are to specify containment, the location model contains one
architectural plans and floor plans (which are often based on mereological relation, <contains>, which is uni-directional. Using
architectural plans). While these formats do not lend themselves this relation, it is possible to define hierarchical and/or
easily to the automatic computation of routes, a location model for overlapping areas such as floors, wings or departments.
indoor navigation should be well integrated with them.
Figure 2 illustrates our proposed model using an example from the
intended deployment area. The top part of the figure shows a
3.4 Technological constraints
section of the floor plan of the C floor in InfoLab21. The small
Since precise indoor localization usually requires expensive black rectangles correspond to the door displays we deployed in
infrastructure, it is worth considering alternatives that are more the context of the Hermes II rollout. The bottom part of figure
readily available. Among those alternatives, most are either cell- depicts the model corresponding to the highlighted area in the
based (i.e. the granularity of positional information corresponds to floor plan. In the example, office C1 is located to the North of C
the size of cells) or proximity-based (i.e. the position of an entity corridor South and display C1, and to the West of office C2. C1 is
is sensed relative to another). Through the use of overlapping also part of the C floor South Wing as well as C floor. There is
cells and/or varying signal strength, more precise location one door connecting C1 to C corridor South.
information can be inferred (subject to calibration and
unreliability). In order for a location model to be of practical
relevance, it should be usable with positional information of lower
granularity/quality as returned by technologies such as Bluetooth,
NFC or RFID-based approaches.
4. TOWARDS A LOCATION MODEL
Earlier models of GAUDI [Kray, 2005] were based on a publish-
subscribe architecture for distribution of direction information to
the public displays and the sensors that were located within the
spaces containing the public displays. The mapping between
location (defined by Cartesian coordinates) and space (defined by
the existence of a sensor and a public display) was achieved
bottom-up. The model that was created [Harrison, 2008] allowed
for the analysis of simple properties of the information. For
example it could be checked that a display would contain the
correct information when a visitor moved into the space or that a
visitor could always see the next display in the direction that they
were required to travel. A disadvantage of this model was the lack
of information in terms of more semantic notions relating to how
the spaces were organized and related.
We require an alternative model that captures the spatial entities
(such as rooms and floors), their interconnections and their
hierarchy (that rooms are contained within wings for example)
with a mapping to the physical locations defined in the earlier
models. This model should also enable a clearer understanding of
adjacency of space and containment of space that does not require
a bottom up analysis based on the coordinate representation. In
addition, we need to be able to reason that, for example, rooms are
connected by staircases, or elevators or not at all.
Figure 2. Floor plan with doors and public displays (top) and
Based on these considerations we designed a model that location model corresponding to the highlighted area (bottom)
incorporates three types of relations, which are key to
Using our proposed model, these properties are expressed using
understanding the space: directional, connectional and
the following relations:
mereological relations. Directional relations define in which
direction one entity is located with respect to another one, and are C1 <north-of>, <connected-by-door> C corridor South
bi-directional. There are three pairs of relations: <north- C1 <north-of> display C1
of>/<south-of>, <west-of>/<east-of>, and <on-top-of>/<below>.
C1 <west-of> C2
Note that directional relations do not specify whether or not it is
possible to move between two entities that are linked by a C floor, C floor South Wing <contains> C1
directional relation. Connectional relations define whether and
how entities such as rooms are connected. There are 6 bi- 5. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
directional relations of this type: <directly-connected>, In order to start assessing the feasibility of the location model, we
<connected-by-door>, <connected-by-stairs>, <connected-by- evaluated the model against the requirements set out in section 3,
escalator> and <connected-by-elevator>. The final relation, and analyzed its applicability to Infolab21 and the Hermes II
<visible-from>, is uni-directional, and is used to model whether a system.
public display is visible from a particular area. In order to be ableGeneral requirements. Using the graph defined by nodes and the configuration can be represented using the proposed model,
connectional relations, it is straightforward to apply a path finding displays mounted on such a curved wall would either only be
algorithm for graphs (such as A*). Since the model is inspired by modeled using the <visible-from> relation or require further
architectural plans and floor plans, the second requirement (easy directional relations. In addition, there are several doors
integration with the format used to represent environment) is also connecting various parts of the building, which are open only at
fulfilled. Similarly, orientation information is obviously encoded certain times of the day, and which are therefore not well captured
at the basic level (through directional relations). As buildings by our proposed model. One solution would be to add a temporal
have a finite number of rooms, corridors etc., the number of nodes parameter to connectional relations. Alternatively, the whole
and relations in any model will also be limited, and thus model could be made dynamic (i.e. by introducing time slices).
computationally manageable.
6. CONCLUSIONS
Domain-specific requirements. We identified three requirements
In this paper we have described a set of requirements for a
in this area: the need for 3D/2.5D, representation of spatial/logical
location model to support navigation in indoor environments
grouping and compatibility with architectural/floor plans.
containing an infrastructure of digital displays. Such environments
Through the <on-top-of> and <below> relations, our model
frequently are relatively complex and difficult to navigate for
supports a basic notion of 2.5D. The mereological relation allows
visitors. Our investigation of requirements and constraints
for the definition of partitions and groups (thus fulfilling the
applicable to a location model for indoor navigation has been
second requirement). Finally, as stated above and as
evaluated in the context of a deployed public display network
demonstrated in Figure 2, the model is well integrated with
(Hermes II).
architectural/floor plans.
In the near future we plan to implement a location model based on
Technological constraints. A key requirement in this area is the
the considerations reported here and to test it by means of an
ability to cope with positional information of lower
actual deployment. We would also like to explore the implications
quality/granularity. Since our location model mainly operates on
of combining such an indoor location model with an outdoor
the level of rooms rather than Euclidean coordinates, it is well
location model and to investigate the link to display content
suited to work with any sensing technology that can resolve a
generation. In addition, future work will include analyzing the
user’s location at this level. In particular, this includes readily
temporal dimension that needs consideration when populating
available and cost efficient technologies such as Bluetooth, NFC
location models, for example, how to handle in a dynamic and
or RFID, which are (or shortly will be) included in a large number
flexible way changes to the available display infrastructure.
of mobile devices.
Deployment issues. Applying the location model described in 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
section 4 to the Hermes II deployment and investigating its use for This work is partially funded by the EPSRC CASIDE project
navigation support through mobile devices and public displays (grant ref: EP/C005589).
reveals a number of benefits and drawbacks.
8. REFERENCES
The size of the resulting model compares favorably to the one
used in the original GAUDI implementation, which relied on Abowd, G. and C. Atkeson and J. Hong and S. Long and R.
Euclidean coordinates and thus required at least four nodes and Kooper and M. Pinkerton, (1997) “Cyberguide: a mobile context-
edges to define a rectangular room. The three types of relations aware tour guide”, ACM Wireless Networks, 3, 421-433,
can also be represented by a simple graph, which allows for the Baus, J. A. Krüger, and W. Wahlster, (2002) ‘A resource-
easy application of standard routing algorithms such as A*. Only adaptive mobile navigation system’, in Proceedings of the 7th
those edges representing connectional relations need to be international conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, January
considered in this case. 13-16, San Francisco, California, USA, 2002.
Through the use of directional relations it is possible to quickly Becker C. and F. Dürr. (2005) ‘On location models for ubiquitous
derive route directions for a given route by translating cardinal computing’ Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 9(1), 20-31,
directional relations defined within the model into directional 2005.
relations relative to the route and the user. Public displays are part
Cheverst, K., D. Fitton, and A. Dix. (2003) “Exploring the
of the model as well and their visibility and orientation is fully
Evolution of Office Door Displays”, in: Public and Situated
specified. This aspect has two key beneficial consequences:
Displays: Social and Interactional aspects of shared display
- Displays can serve as landmarks when generating directions technologies. K. O’Hara, M. Perry, et al (Eds). Chapter 6, pp.
as their location, orientation and visibility can be reasoned 141-169, Kluwer. ISBN 1-4020-1677-8, 2003.
about within the model. This is particularly advantageous for Harrison, M. C. Kray, and J. Campos. (2008) “Exploring an
directions conveyed through a mobile device, which usually option space to engineer a ubiquitous computing system”
have no means to sense the orientation of the user. Electronic Notes on Theoretical Computing Science, 208, 41-55,
2008.
- Directions shown on public displays (either as text or via
arrows) can be generated directly from the orientation Kray, C., K. Cheverst, D. Fitton, C. Sas, J. Patterson, M.
information embedded in the model. Rouncefield, and C. Stahl, (2006) “Sharing control of dispersed
situated displays between nomadic and residential users”, in
We also discovered two issues, which require further
Proceedings of MobileHCI ’06, pp. 61–68, New York, NY, USA,
investigation. There are four rooms, which have curved walls
ACM Press. 2006.
(reception and three meeting rooms). While the doorKray, C., G. Kortuem, and A. Krüger, (2005) “Adaptive Location- and Context-Awareness (LoCA), LNCS 3987, pp. 74–
navigation support with public displays”, in Proceedings of IUI 85, Munich, Germany, 2006, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
2005. ACM Press, New York, NY, 2005.
Spreitzer, M. and M. Theimer, (1993) “Providing Location
Satoh. I. (2007) “A location model for smart environments”, Information in a Ubiquitous Computing Environment'', in
Pervasive and Mobile Computing 3(2), 158-179, (2007). Proceedings. 14th Symposium on Operating System Principles,
ACM Press, December 1993, pp. 270-283.
C. Stahl and J. Haupert, (2006) “Taking location modelling to
new levels: A map modelling toolkit for intelligent
environments”, in Proceedings of the International Workshop on