Hybrid Indoor Location System for Museum Tourist
Routes in Augmented Reality.
Gabriel Villarrubia, Juan F. De Paz, F. De La Prieta Javier Bajo
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Department of Artificial Intelligence. Faculty of
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain Computer Science, Technical University of Madrid, Spain
{gvg,fcods,fer,corchado}@usal.es jbajo @fi.upm.es
Abstract: At present, indoor positioning systems is one of the participants, whether they be visitors or staff, is increasingly
areas of research that is continuously growing. The main aim here is required today by museum directors. For example, it is
to develop a system of indoor location with a similar functionality to important to know which exhibit is most popular and what
outdoor location systems such as GPS (Global Positioning System). áreas of the museum receive the most foot traffic. This paper
The main difficulty of indoor location systems lies in their presents an innovative indoor location system for museums
establishment costs given the resources they initially need. This paper whose objective is to improve the services provided by the
presents an innovative indoor location system based on the fusion of existing audio guide systems using current techniques of
information from multiple sensors on a smartphone. This proposed
ambient intelligence and reducing start up costs. The
system is evaluated in a case study with the aim of obtaining
combination of sensors and cameras for pattern recognition and
locations within a museum and displaying on the screen of a mobile
the use of Wi- Fi technology [4] to estimate the position of the
device information about the paintings we are seeing in real time,
visitor allows us to develop a rich set of information for
thus improving the efficiency of the existing systems that rely on
museum directors and which allows for multimedia content
audio-guides.
such as paintings, videos, and sets of photographs to be viewed
Keywords: augmented reality, Wi-Fi, indoor location, on a mobile device by an end user, a task not allowed by audio
guides [9]. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The
next section discusses the museums that make use of new
I. INTRODUCTION
technologies. Section 3 presents the proposal for a guided
Currently, when a user visits a museum, several study visit in a Spanish cathedral, and finally Section 4 outlines
supplementary materials are offered to the user such as audio the conclusions and the future work to be carried out.
guides, brochures, or even books, in order to allow visitors to
understand or expand the information about the items
II. BACKGROUND
displayed in the museum in a simple way. However, these
systems have several disadvantages, the most prominent being
The use of new technologies in the tourism sector [2] is
not having enough supplementary materials for all visitors,
continuously increasing. At present, there is a conference held
followed by the depletion of brochures or even the need to
annually at the European level that addresses the use of new
revise or expand any information in these, which would trigger
an expensive reprinting. In fact, this last disadvantage is technologies in museums. The conference, called "Museum
common since musueums are constantly modifying their Next", seeks to present and discuss new trends and the most
collections. Currently, the evolution of technology allows us to innovative and efficient ways for museums to learn to
represent multimedia content on mobile devices. Moreover, creatively use the technology currently available.
accessibility is facilitated because this content can be
customized, for seniors for example. Its is much easier for A. Use of Smartphones in Museums
seniors to listen to a spoken phrase than to read an informative The importance and potential impact of new technologies for
poster. It is vital to mention the high cost of current systems museums [6] and cultural spaces is vital. At present, there are
based on audio guides which are closed systems and whose
several museums where solutions have already been
modification or adaptation to certain scenarios is a very
introduced to provide visitors with new experiences relying on
complicated task. In museums that have these systems [5], it is
these mobile devices. [7]
necessary to deploy a series of RFID beacons (Radio
Frequency IDentification) or QRCodes (Quick Response
The famous "Tate" galleries in [22] the United Kingdom were
Code), which often aesthetically mar the environment [8].
among the first to recognize the value of the Internet, both to
Another deficiency in existing systems of this type resides in
attract visitors and to offer multimedia guides for its
the boundary distances between frames, as they can not be
exhibitions and activities. They have more than 16
placed too close together so that the beacons do not interfere
applications, most of them are free and cover topics such as
with each other. Moreover, analysis of the behavior of musuemeducation (guide of art terms) or fun with augmented reality Bluetooth: The main advantage of this system is its low cost.
apps. However, it has a very limited range and requires a large
number of devices to cover a building. It presents an
The "Museo Del Prado" [22] is also a pioneer in this field. approximate average error margin of 2 meters. A location
Their new app features 400 works from the permanent system based on this technology, checks the number of
collection. These are presented chronologically in a bluetooth [16] devices detected around and then proceeds to
classification by international schools and other features. In determine its position by way of a triangulation algorithm. The
addition, a selection of 50 masterpieces with large images for disadvantage of this system lies in the number of devices
navigation in them is available. needed to provide an accurate system and the RSSI (Received
signal strength indication) indicator that has very unstable
Another of the leading applications in this field is that of values.
“Gagosian Galleries " [22], the free application is updated 4
Ultra WideBand: As one of the most used technologies for
times a year with exhibitions and multimedia packages on the
indoor location [19], it is characterized by a very high transfer
12 Gagosian galleries.
rate, and an accuracy of about one meter. Is a candidate
technology to help the problem of low accuracy presented by
The “State Hermitage Museum” [22], in St. Petersburg, also
the other systems, offering a great sturdiness against changes
has its own application. You can get a great virtual tour of the
in the environment including "doors, walls, presence of
museum with 100 major 3D panoramas, along with
objects or movements of people." The main disadvantage of
descriptions of individual works of art.
this technology is that its use is not regulated and therefore it
cannot be used freely as with WiFi airwaves of “2.4 Ghz "
In the Hungarian capital, the "Museum of Fine Arts" [22] also
systems.
has a unique application. Earlier this year, the museum
presented an application for hearing impaired visitors. It
ZigBee: ZigBee [17] technology, based on the IEEE 802.15.4
features videos in several languages of international signs and
standard, is characterized by its low power consumption
150 paintings from the collections of the museum with an
devices, its use of mesh topology, and the ease with which it
interactive map and 3D images.
can be made, since the current electronic devices using this
After carrying out this review on the use of smartphones in
technology are very simple. Today, we can say that ZigBee is
cultural centers, we can see more and more museums around
the most appropriate technology along with WiFi [21]
the world who start developing applications for mobile
networks to develop indoor locations motors. Its main
devices in order to provide their users with a new experience
advantage is its low cost and low power emission; however,
during their visits.
its main disadvantage is that it has a very small bandwidth
which means that it can not offer other services such as
B. Wireless Location Technologies streaming, internet etc.
Next, a review of the state of the art that will address the
analysis and study of the various existing technologies today C. Indoor Localization Algorithms
that allow to estimate the position of a user in a closed There are mainly three types of algorithms [1] used by RTLS
environment becomes. (tracking systems in real time) to determine the location of
Infrared: Infrared localization [18] is not suitable for indoor mobile nodes: Triangulation, Fingerprinting and
location due to two factors, the first is its short range "about multilateration. Triangulation allows for the coordinates of the
two meters," and because it requires the use of auxiliary links element we wish to locate by calculating the length of the
with a line of sight between two extremes. Because of its sides of a triangle from incoming angles of the signal received
limited scope, it is necessary to use a very large number of at each antenna, which is required to have at least 3 points of
infrared emitters. In addition, the problem of not having direct reference. The Fingerprinting [11], also known as location or
view from all locations would prevent us from detecting symbolic signpost, is based on the study of the characteristics
certain positions. We note the existence of a well-known of each location area, making measurements of the
project called WISP "Wireless Indoor Positioning System" characteristics of radio frequency and estimating what area of
that uses infrared localization to estimate the position of a influence each device is located. Finally, the multilateration
user. based on the estimated distance from the reader to the mobile
device, by measuring this parameter as the RSSI (Received
Wi-Max: Based on the IEEE 802.16 [20] protocol, with a Signal Strength Indication) or TDOA (Time Difference of
transmission rate of up to 70Mbps, it was intended to Arrival), so that the distances intersect estimated from each
interconnect large areas of about 50 km. However, due to the device at three or more fixed nodes called beacons can
large scope of this technology, its use is not recommended for determine the points at which such devices are located.
determining interior position. Multilateration achieves maximum outcomes [12] outdoors
with triangulation, but significantly lower performance
indoors because RSSI levels vary depending on the presenceof elements (people, objects or animals) and also based on infrastructure also currently the most smartphones have Wi-Fi
distance calculation, so it is necessary to make a prior estimate technology is not forcing the user to carry any additional
of these distances from RSSI values which are constantly beacon, simply visitor is located by its Smartphone. The
changing shape. Localization techniques based on process of collecting different RSSI levels from the mobile
triangulation and multilateration are inefficient because the device is as follows:
signals are very much attenuated by the different elements of
the room (walls, doors, walls).
III. MELDING SYSTEM INFORMATION
The main objective of this section is to propose an architecture
that combines information from multiple sensors, allows us to
estimate the true position of a user within a museum, and can
also, show the mobile end-user, multimedia content on what
we are watching at that moment.
The Wi –Fi system allow us to estimate a first level, the area
where a user is located, then to refine the location and know
what monumental work is looking at the time, the user can use
the camera. We can note that the use of the location on two
levels, makes our proposal unique , that is, on one level the Wi
-Fi technology is used to distinguish that room is and then To deploy the solution localization and reduce costs, we used
proceeds to download user terminal patterns of the pictures the actual hardware, leveraging existing routers whose model
that can be displayed in that room so that finally , with the is TL-WR740N. The main advantage of this device is the
help of an image recognition algorithm , we detect on that ability to install a Linux-based firmware that allows us to run
chart is , in other words, if a user is in a room initially apply programs in script mode, in our case, we have replaced the
only classifier which to distinguish that picture is seeing all factory version for DD-WRT based firmware.
possible in that room and not unload hundreds of images of
pictures that are not close to such user that may impair the
efficiency of the algorithm.
The use of a location on two levels, using fusion technology
(camera -WiFi), promotes efficiency in data consumption by
mobile terminals, as the Internet data exchange is reduced.
A. Location System Fig 1. Used Wireless Router
Due to the particular constraints of the environment (“the case
Using a custom firmware allows the installation of a new
study will be validated in a cathedral " ) and the requirement
software that analyzes all packets received by the router. This
of cost, has taken the wireless infrastructure already deployed
software also known as Wiviz is a small utility that open-
in the museum. The system used to estimate the position of the
source can be embedded in the firmware DD-WRT monitor
visitors in the exhibition is based on the use of Access Points
and display allowing wireless devices that are close to the
(APs) that transmit a Wi-Fi signal, the signal quality is usually
router. This utility can be invoked through the command line
expressed in RSSI and is measured in dB allowing to estimate
or through a Web interface. Below is a representative image of
the position of a user by fingerprintg technique. For this, two
a nearby beacons elements shown.
distinct phases, in the first phase, also called the calibration
process has been carried out relating the environment mapping
RSSI measurements from the APs to the coordinates (x, y) of
the environment, this map being stored in a database for later
use in the phase estimate. During the second phase, also called
phase estimation or location, is the process in which the
position of a visitor is estimated to be, the mobile who gets the
RSSI measurements of the access points detected around at
that point and are compared to the measurements stored in the
calibration phase. In this comparison, the system is able to
determine the coordinate ( x , y) by utilizing Euclidian
distance model [13] is defined as follows:
SS is a measure of the signal strength, P is each point and
Fig 2. Nearby Wireless Devices
AP1, AP2, AP3 are access points. The main advantage is the
use of this technique is the low cost and the use of existingThe main advantage of using Wiviz [2] is that it is not a
necessary condition that wireless devices are paired to the
router to be detected and get the signal level of each.
Furthermore, we can detect near a hotspot mobile devices,
without installing any software on the terminals of end users,
it is very useful to evaluate the user behavior in a mall as the
current commercial systems require the installation of an
application on the end user device. To detect users who are
located near a mark, used a small program that allows us to
send bash information Wiviz a manager to estimate the
position of the central server users.
This script is executed automatically by all routers in the
cathedral, being the very basic operation, first and place once
the boot process of the router finished the Wiviz software is Fig 4. Location of artwork in a chapel of the Cathedral.
During the calibration phase, we use the four measures of AP
started and the program output is redirected to a central server
in each of the nine points so generating calibration map taken.
using port 3000 where the data are interpreted. This program
To evaluate the system, 4 random points, where users spent an
runs in cycles and user information is updated every 5
average of 20 seconds were determined. The use of the
seconds.
fingerprint technique, in combination with the model of
while true; do Euclidean distances, provides an average error of 2.40 meters,
wiviz & small error for a building of 4500m ^ 2.
sleep 5
killall –USR1 wiviz Below is a table with the error obtained in meters at each of
cat /tmp/wiviz2-dump | telnet mainserver 3000 the points where the system was verified.
killall –q wiviz
done
Then AP locations located throughout the exhibition which act
as beacons to locate and serve different users within the
exhibition.
Table 5. Error average
If we propose a diagram of the architecture designed, could be
the following:
Image 3. Preinstalled Beacons in the Cathedral
The various works of art found inside the cathedral are located
in showrooms about 20m^2 separating one of them from other
work in about 3.5meters. Here is a picture of one of the
exhibition rooms with different points of interest as well as the
relative position of the access points used to estimate the
user's position within a room is shown.
Fig 6. Architecture.B. Pattern Recognition System responses are calculated Haar apart 5x5 sampling. For
Due to technical limitations imposed by the use of mobile simplicity, consider dx and dy the Haar responses [14]
devices where power / battery efficiency ratio is important, it concerning the orientation of the point of interest. The
has chosen to use SURF algorithm to extract points of interest representation of sub-regions is represented by a vector v of
in an image. Also called SURF (speed up robust feature) is an components:
evolution algorithm SIFT (Scale- invariant feature transform) If we include the 4x4 sub-regions is SURF descriptor with a
that improves the robustness to changes in an image and has a length of 64 values for each of the points of interest identified.
faster computer without any loss of performance. In our case,
the use of efficient algorithms, ensures a longer lasting Following is an example of how the algorithm is able to
battery. Using SIFT SURF front is mainly based on the determine the keypoints in common with two different
velocity of the points of interest also known as keypoints, as images.
these contain far fewer descriptors. Then, what is the
procedure described SURF algorithm for detection of points of
interest (keypoints) , assigning the orientation and finally
obtaining SURF descriptor [15].
Fig 8. Keypoints correlation
CASE OF STUDY
The case study chosen to evaluate the proposal aims to
develop a mobile application for Android and IPhone devices
allowing the end user to make a guided tour of the Cathedral
of Salamanca (Spain). To verify the overall operational
functionality of the system, a Web viewfinder for the director
of the exhibition will be designedin order to analyze the
behavior of users within the exhibition.
This will allow the direct to know at all times which areas of
the exhibition have more visitors or
in which part of the exhibition they
remain longer. To summarize the
process of recognition of a work of
art by an end user, this process
Image 7. SURF Detection Process includes the following steps: first,
Detection of attractions is the first stage of the process in
the visitor downloads a mobile
terms of extracting the keypoints. The high efficiency of this
application from various official
algorithm is based on this phase and is based on the use of the
marketplaces for Android / iPhone
Hessian [14] array is defined as follows: Given a point P = (x,
platforms, and with the help of
y) of the image, the Hessian matrix H (p, o) of the point p is
geopositioning technology he is allowed to see the nearby
museums feature our platform.
defined by: Once the user accesses the site, the application automatically
Where is the convolution of the Gaussian second will serve as an audio-guide throughout the visit, allowing the
user to select the language of the virtual guide.
order, with the image I in point x, and similarly for
and The approximations of the partial
derivatives denoted as Dxx, Dxy and Dyy and the determinant
of the matrix is calculated as follows:
Orientation assignment: is to obtain the orientation of each of
the points of interest obtained in the previous step. The
orientation of the points is obtained by calculation of the Haar
response.
SURF descriptors: for each point of interest, a square region
20s is constructed with the determined orientation and in the Fig 9. Main Menu in Mobile Application
previous stage is subdivided into 4x4 sub-regions in whichAfterward, the location system estimates what part of the From the point of view of the director of the exhibition, we
exhibition the visitor and once this area is identified, the can show the real time location of different visitors who are
mobile only downloads possible patterns of images of the using the platform and on the individual pictures that are
paintings and monuments that are close to your position. interacting at the time of the query.
Finally the user focuses on the box of which they would like
information and the system accurately recognizes the table on
which it is positioned.
Fig 13. Locations of visitors
If we analyze the location of users over a period of time, we
can obtain behavioral patterns. In the next picture, the areas
where users have spent more time looking at the works of art
can be seen. In the image areas reflect more intensity where
Fig 10. User Camera Focus ArtWork
users have been steadily for a long period of time. On the
Finally and once the image is recognized, a menu is made other hand less dense areas reflect traffic areas.
available to the user with information about the work that is
currently displayed. This information can be an image gallery,
related works, an explanatory video, text etc.
Fig 14. Map of heat generated during a period of time
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Fig 11. The virtual assistant informs you about what you're watching
The proposed system allows for the ability to design an
architecture that combines information from various sensors
such as a camera and uses Wi-Fi technology to estimate the
true position of a user within a museum, and can also show on
the mobile of an end-user, multimedia content about what is
being seen at that moment. The main advantage of our system
compared with other existing systems is the low cost of
implementation and the level of accuracy achieved because
the Wi-Fi technology merged with pattern recognition of
images that are taken by a camera estimate that part of the
museum visitor is as specific box which the user is pointing
his mobile device without any QrCode or RFID beacon.
Fig 12. Gallery of selected monuments
By using a smartphone and reducing the cost required for
maintenance of existing systems based on audio - guides, for
example due to the updates that are triggered when we want to
update the contents of an exhibition, due to the need to update
each audio guide also using these devices allows us, forexample, show much more elaborate, such as videos or any VII. REFERENCES
type of graphic explanation using a virtual interpreter
multimedia content. Viewing a virtual guide produces an
1. C.N. Huang., C.T. Chan., ZigBee-based indoor
enrichment of the visit with the possibility to choose some
location system by k-nearest neighbor algorithm with
kind of animated pet for a child audience. [7] When the
weighted RSSI, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 5,
application starts, the date of birth of the user is prompted,
pp. 58-65, February 2011.
select the type of optimal route based on their age. In the next
2. Roes I., Personalized Museum Tour with Real-Time
picture the exact location of the user is displayed in the
Adaptation on a Mobile Device with Multi-Point
exhibition and the works you should visit.
Touch Interface, July 2010
3. Tapia, D., Bajo, J., De Paz, J.F., Alonso., Rodriguez
S. Using Multi-Layer Perceptrons to Enhance the
Performance of Indoor RTLS 2011
4. Hui L., Darabi, H., Banerjee, P., and Jing Liu.,2007.
Survey of Wireless Indoor Positioning Techniques
and Systems. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C:
Applications and Reviews, IEEE Transactions on, 37,
6 (2007), 1067-1080.
5. Tesoriero R., Tebar R., Gallud J.A., Lozano M.D.,
Penichet V.M.R., Improving location awareness in
indoor spaces using RFID technology, Expert
Systems with Applications, vol. 37, (1), pp. 894-898,
Fig 15. User Location 2010
6. Gikas J., Grant M., Mobile computing devices in
Content development is scalable, allowing multimedia content
higher education: Student perspectives on learning
increase in a transparent manner, and that the update is
with cellphones, smartphones & social media, The
immediate and simple for the user, the applications of the
Internet and Higher Education, vol. 19, pp. 18-26,
devices are updated automatically. We have managed to locate
May 2013
the user on a map in real time, can analyze the behavior of
7. Othaman M.K., H. Petrie., Measuring the Usability
users within the exhibition. The application administrator can
of a Smartphone Delivered Museum Guide,Procedia
observe that part of the gallery visitors stay longer and show
- Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 97, pp. 629-
the guards in charge of security, which areas are more likely to
637, November 2013
be saturated at certain times through the development of a heat
8. Schultz M.K., A case study on the appropriateness of
map.
using quick response (QR) codes in libraries and
museums, Library & Information Science Research,
vol. 35, Issue 3, , pp 207-215, July 2013
V. LINES FOR FUTURE WORK
9. Gianluigi C., Olivo P., Schettini R., Browsing
One possible future improvements that can be implemented in
museum image collections on a multi-touch table
this system, is to add a recommendation system based
,Information Systems, vol. 37, pp. 169-182, April
museums tastes of users using data mining technologies [23].
2012
Another possible evolutions is regarding the statistics
10. Pesonen J.,Horster E., Near field communication
generated by the web application, with the largest number of
technology in tourism,Tourism Management
reports so that the administrator could have much more
Perspectives, vol. 4, pp. 11-18, October 2012
information about the tastes of the users. The use of the
11. C. Nerguizian, C. Despins, amd S. Affes, "Indoor
compass as additional sensor would offer the user guidance
Geolocation with Received Signal Strength
system indoors providing the real works marked by some kind
Fingerprinting Technique and Neural Networks".
of route based on your tastes path. Use accelerometer would
Telecommunications and Networking - ICT 2004. pp.
determine the rate of movement of visitors and could analyze
866- 875 2004.
their behavior in more detail, such as whether certain hours its
12. Villarrubia, G., Bajo, J., De Paz, J.F., Corchado,
movements are faster.
J.M., Real time positioning system using different
sensors, Information Fusion (FUSION), 2013 16th
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
International, pp. 604-609, July 2013.
13. John G. Cleary, Leonard E. Trigg "K: An Instance-
This work has been carried out by the project Intelligent
based Leamer Using an Entropic Distance Measure"
Platform for the Management and Tracking of Healthcare
12th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Personnel and Patients in Hospital Environments. The project
pp. 108-114, 1995.
has been supported by Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional
and Junta Castilla y León FEDER. 0411VA002114. Bay H., Ess A., Tuytelaars T., Gool L.V., Speeded-
Up Robust Features, Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, vol. 110, pp. 346-359, June 2008
15. Brown M., Szeliski R., Winder S., Multi-image
matching using multi-scale oriented patches.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conf. on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 1, pp. 510–517,
2005
16. Gothlin L, N., Korhonen, J., Ojala T.: Bluetooth and
WAP push based location-aware mobile advertising
system Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services, ACM Press,2004
17. F Sh.,ZigBee Wireless Networks and Transceivers,
Chapter 1 - ZigBee Basics, pp. 1-24,2008
18. Aitenbichler, E.,Muhlhauser, M., An IR local
positioning system for smart items and devices,
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, pp. 334-
339, May 2003
19. Bellusci, G., Junlin Yan., Janssen, G.J.M., Tiberius.,
Ultra-Wideband Positioning Demonstrator Using
Audio Signals,Positioning, Navigation and
Communication, WPNC '07. 4th Workshop, pp. 71-
76,March 2007
20. Isa A.A.M., Othman M.H., Isa M.S.M., Haron N.Z.,
Zakaria Z., Zin M.S.I.M. Utilising MIMO for
positioning in mobile WiMAX systems,Wireless
Technology and Applications (ISWTA), IEEE
Symposium, pp. 7-10, Sept 2013
21. Carlos E. Galvan T, Issac Galvan-Tejada, Ernesto
Ivan Sandoval, Ramon Brena, Wifi bluetooth based
combined positioning algorithm, Procedia
Engineering, vol. 35, 2012, pp. 101-108, 2012
22. http://www.comunicacion-
cultural.com/2013/05/06/las-10-mejores-apps-para-
visitar-museos/ (Last visited March 2014).
23. DI Tapia, JF De Paz, S Rodríguez, J Bajo, JM
Corchado. Multi-agent system for security control on
industrial environments. International Transactions
on System Science and Applications Journal 4 (3),
pp. 222-226. 2008.
24. J Bajo, JM Corchado. Evaluation and monitoring of
the air-sea interaction using a CBR-Agents approach.
Case-Based Reasoning Research and Development,
50-62. 2005.
25. DI Tapia, RS Alonso, JF De Paz, JM Corchado.
Introducing a distributed architecture for
heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. LNCS
5518, pp. 116-123. 2009.
26. S Rodriguez, V Julián, J Bajo, C Carrascosa, V Botti,
JM Corchado. Agent-based virtual organization
architecture. Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence 24 (5), 895-910. 2011.