See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228764083
Indoor Navigation for Complex Environments
Article · January 2010
CITATIONS READS
5 615
3 authors, including:
Maarten Weyn Martin Klepal
University of Antwerp / iMinds Cork Institute of Technology
148 PUBLICATIONS 2,705 CITATIONS 71 PUBLICATIONS 1,734 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Martin Klepal on 03 June 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.PAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011 1
Indoor Navigation for Complex Environments
TimNelen,MaartenWeynandMartinKlepal.
Abstract—Thispaperinvestigatesthefeasibilityandperformanceofnavigationforindoorenvironments,basedonlocalizationsystems
withlimitedaccuracy.Workingindependentlyofthelocalizationsystem,thenavigationsystemreadsoutthesensordataofthephone
andsendsittothelocalizationsystem.AtopologicalrepresentationofthebuildingisautomaticallygeneratedusingaVoronoidiagram.
The user is able to select from a predefined list of destinations inside the building; subsequently the optimal route to his desired
destination is calculated and displayed on the screen, accompanied by turn-by-turn instructions provided according to the heading
oftheuser,estimatedfromthedigitalcompassofthesmartphone.Thisheadingalsoplaysanimportantroleinthemapmatching
process,usedtomaptheestimatedlocationtothetopologicalrepresentationofthebuilding.Theapplicationcontainsthedifferent
elementsneededfornavigation,andisabletoprovidethenecessaryinstructionstogetauserfromhiscurrentpositiontohisdesired
destination,insidethebuilding.
IndexTerms—Indoornavigation,mapmatching,Voronoidiagram
(cid:70)
1 INTRODUCTION
VISITORS of certain events, like exhibits or trade-fares, system,thatway;theapplicationwillbewidelyapplicable.The
usuallynavigatethemselvesthroughthebuildingusinga navigation system requires, of course, some interaction with
floor plan they got at the entrance, or by following the signs the localizationsystem. Itis able tosend sensor datafrom the
on walls et cetera. In other words, a rather primitive way of mobile phone, in the right format, to the localization system.
navigation. When a building gets more complex, this type of Aside from location determination, other considerations
navigation tends to fail, because it is too hard for the visitor have to be made when developing an indoor navigation sys-
to find his way. To determine his current location, he has to tem.Thestructureofabuildingmustberepresentedinaway,
look at his environment and, subsequently, identify it on the that it is suitable for routing. Subsequently, the estimation of
floorplan.Inaddition,thevisitorhimselfhastodeterminethe theuserscurrentpositionmustbemappedtothisstructure,us-
optimal path leading to his destination. The ideal situation is ingatechniquecalledmapmatching,whichwillbeexplained
where ones location is determined automatically, and where in the remainder of this paper. All this information has to
the application gets the visitor from his current location to be presented to the user in a clear way, using turn-by-turn
the desired destination using visual indications on a portable instructions, so he can reach his desired destination.
device,likeadynamicmap,accompaniedbyarrowsandpos- Theremainderofthispaperisstructuredasfollows:InSec-
siblevoice-contextualinformation.Anexampleofthiskindof tion2,anoverviewoftheexistingindoornavigationsystemsis
navigationsystemisoutdoornavigationusingGPStechnology. given. Section 3 describes each functional block in the system
For a couple of years now, GPS has been the standard for architecture,whereasSection4brieflydescribesthetoolsused
navigationpurposes.Almosteverycariseitherequippedwith during this research. In Section 5 the results are discussed,
abuilt-innavigationsystem,ortheownerhasoneattachedto followed by a conclusion in Section 6.
hiswindshieldordashboard.Otherexamplesare:theuseofa
GPSforrecreationpurposes,portablenavigationdevicesused
2 STATE OF THE ART
for hiking and location-based games in urban environments
where the location of the players is part of the gameplay. A variety of different approaches have been made to develop
All of the previous mentioned examples are located outdoors, a complete indoor navigation system [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].
leading to the main disadvantage of applications based on The main difference between them is the technology used
GPS: it is a technique which functions well in wide open for localization. As previously mentioned, GPS is not the
spaces, but when deployed indoors, the reception often fails preferredtechnologyforindoorusage,becauseoftheweakness
and the location cannot be determined. When developing a of the signal, caused by the attenuation of walls; therefore,
navigation system that has to function indoors, we must use an alternative has to be used. Ruppel and Gschwandtner [1]
alternative technologies for determining the location. Unlike present to spread barcodes around the building to determine
GPS for outdoors, there is not one specific technology which the location of a user and navigate him from point A to B,
willgetthisjobdone,becauseeachone(i.e.Wi-Fi,GSM,RFID, using the camera of a smartphone or other portable device
Bluetooth,)hasitsdownfalls.Avarietyoflocalizationsystems to identify the barcode and calculate the route to be taken.
have been developed, all using different technologies. Because all the data is on the device and no connection with
Because of this big variety, I have chosen to develop the a central server has to be made, the privacy of the user is
navigation application independently from the localization retained,whichisoneofthemainadvantagesofthisapproach.
Furthermore, the response time of the system is minimized,
becauseoftheon-boardprocessing.Bypointingthecameraof
• T.NelenandM.WeynarewiththeUniversityCollegeofAntwerp,dept.
his device at a barcode, the user can get an instruction in less
IWT–Electronics-ICT,Paardenmarkt92,2000Antwerp,Belgium
E-mail:seehttp://www.e-lab.be/ than a second. The main disadvantage of the system is that
• M. Klepal is with Cork Institute of Technology, Center for Adaptive there is no constant location determination. When a user gets
WirelessSystem,Cork,Ireland aninstructionbypointinghisdeviceatabarcode,hestillhasto
E-mail:martin.klepal@cit.ie
discover the next barcode to get the next instruction. Between2 PAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011
these2points,theuserisunawareofhispositioninthebuild- withouthavingtoworryhowthispositionistobecalculated.
ing and is prone to error, i.e. misinterpreting the instruction The advantage of this approach is that different localization
and walking in the wrong direction. This error will not be systems can be hooked up to the application, each using their
corrected until the user encounters a new barcode and the own techniques to calculate the position. Using an estimation
route is recalculated. Another approach is the use of battery- of the users current position as input, the navigation system
drivenradiobeaconstotransmitlicense-freeradiosignalsthat will be able to calculate the optimal path and display it to
arepickedupbyabeaconreceiverconnectedtoasmartphone the user. In addition, the system will also be able to send
through Bluetooth [2]. Using the received beacon signals, the sensordata,neededforpositioncalculation,tothelocalization
smartphone can determine the users position at any time. system. To work completely independent of the localization
Anotheradvantageisagainthatthereisnoneedtoconnecttoa system, offline routing is also provided. This situation occurs
centralserver,thuspreservingtheprivacyoftheuser.Themain whenthereisnopositionestimateatall.Theuserwillhaveto
disadvantageofthisapproachistheneedforspecialhardware indicatehiscurrentpositiononthemap,subsequentlyaroute
andinfrastructure.Firstofall,radio-transmittingbeaconsmust tohisdesireddestinationwillbecalculated,however,thisroute
beinstalledinthebuildinginfrastructure.Inaddition,theuser will not be dynamically updated.
has to have a beacon receiver connected to his smartphone. Asidefromthesedifferentformsofindoorlocalization,alot
Similar to [1] but instead of using barcodes, Kray et al. [3] ofapproachesalsohavenbeenmadetodisplaytheinformation
use public displays available in a building. The advantage is to the user, in a clear way. One of the most popular choices,
that information can be dynamically shown on these displays mostly due to its simplicity, is to display the map in 2D, with
too, i.e. arrows, a floor plan or other information concerning the users location indicated on the map. A calculated route
the route to be taken. On the other hand, this also requires canthenbedrawnontopofthisoverview,informingtheuser
an extra hardware requirement, since public displays are not how to get to his destination. Although this is the standard
standardinabuilding.TheresearchconductedbyGallagheret for indoor navigation [4], [6], [2], there are other possibilities.
al.[6]andWidyawan[7]focusessolelyonpositioning,indoor Instead of displaying the route on a static aerial map, we can
as well as outdoor. They give a few application examples, give the user more information by displaying a more detailed
but particularly concentrate on the location determination. part of the map seen from the users point of view. As stated
For indoor positioning, a technique called fingerprinting is in [10], this can only be accomplished if the position and the
used; a form of Wi-Fi-localization where, depending on the orientation of the user is known. Because if we know the
signalstrengthofmultipleaccesspoints,localizationinsidethe orientation of a user, we can give him detailed instructions
building can be performed. To use this technology, a database for completing his route, like an arrow indicating which way
of signal strengths and according positions have to be set up he has to go. Whenever the orientation of the user cannot be
first, from which entities can be compared afterwards with determinedaccurately,thearrowsmaysendhiminthewrong
measured signal strengths by clients. For outdoor positioning, direction,whichiswhymoretopologicalinformationisusually
a comparison is made between GPS and Wi-Fi localization, to included, like the corridor he is in, rather than just displaying
investigatewhetherWi-FicanchallengeGPS.Intheirresearch, an arrow. The user can then use this extra information to
it is found that Wi-Fi preforms surprisingly well in matching navigate his way correctly through the building. When no
GPS and sometimes even outperforms it in terms of accuracy. orientation at all is known, we are back at the static overview
The experiments were conducted in a campus-environment. map, where the user himself has to determine his orientation
The main problems are the maintenance of the database and to properly follow the indicated route. In other words, the
the length of the signal strength survey. An advantage of Wi- more information we know about the users orientation, the
Fi localization is the low implementation cost, assuming that moredetailedtheinstructionswecangivehim.In[5]theygo
most buildings are already equipped with a Wi-Fi network a step further, by combining the arrows indicating the right
consisting of multiple access points. That way, the existing direction with camera images of the environment, creating an
infrastructure can be used. Furthermore, the client does not augmented reality based indoor navigation system.
needanyspecialhardware,becausemostsmartphonesareal- The conclusion is that there does not exist a perfect local-
readyequippedwithWi-Fi.Finally,theTime-to-first-fix(TTFF) ization system for indoor environments. In the next Section a
is significantly lower than GPS. Weyn et al. [8], [9] present generalarchitectureisdescribed,providingindoornavigation,
a system using a combination of the following sensor tech- coping with the inaccuracy of indoor localization systems.
nologies available on a smartphone: Wi-Fi, GSM, GPS and
Pedestrian Dead Reckoning (PDR), where an accelerometer is
usedtoestimatethedisplacementofaperson.Thetechnologies
3 ARCHITECTURE
used for localization depend on the environment and the
clients hardware, resulting in an opportunistic localization. In
The general architecture of the indoor navigation system is
other words, the system will work with the data available, so
displayed in Figure 1. In this Section I am going to describe
thattherequirementsforinfrastructureandhardwarearelow.
thefunctionalityofeachblockandhowtheyworktogetherto
The more data available, the more accurate the localization of
form a working application.
userswillbeperformed,asclearlyprovedbytheexperimental
results.Thefusionofthedifferenttechnologiesisdoneusinga
particlefilterwithanadaptivemotionmodel,oneofthemost
3.1 Navigation
advanced techniques for sensor data fusion.
Because of this big variety of localization systems, each The main part of the indoor navigation system consists of the
having its advantages and disadvantages, I have chosen to navigation block. The input will be the position of the user,
develop the navigation application independently of the type retrieved from the server, as discussed in Section 3.3, as well
of localization system. The idea is to start from a position, as the desired destination of the user.PAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011 3
The result is indicated in Figure 2 (a). This obviously pro-
duces a vast amount of unnecessary edges. The first step will
be to remove the ones intersecting with the walls, as it is
topologically impossible to cross walls. This brings down the
amount of edges for this example from 663 to 461.
As a second step, more pruning will be needed. First of all,
this high number of edges, compared to manual input, where
you will have around 75 edges, will severely slow down the
routing algorithm. Furthermore, the route that is ultimately
drawn on the screen will be built up out of these edges.
To improve visual attractiveness, as much redundant edges
as possible are removed, thus smoothing the lines used for
Fig.1. Architecture routing.
A first step in this pruning process is to determine the
connectivity between edges. This is done by counting the
amount of occurrences of each node in the Voronoi diagram.
3.1.1 Mapgeneration
Ifthe2nodesofanedgedonotoverlapwithanyothernodes
To calculate the optimal path from source to destination, a in the diagram, the edge is considered disconnected from the
routing algorithm is used. For those algorithms to work, we whole and is therefore removed.
firstneedtogenerateamapdatabaseofthebuildingwewant Thenextstepwillbetoconsiderendnodes:edgeswithone
to navigate through, containing all the information we need node that has no overlapping, but another that does, so the
to get the user from point A to B. As stated by Gilliron [11], edgeisconnectedtothediagram.Iftheseendnodesareclose
most available maps originate from design plans, developed tothewall,theyareremoved.Thisisbecauseyourdestination
using Computer Aided Design (CAD). Although this kind islikelytobeinthemiddleofaroom.Thenodesthatareclose
of representation is good for construction and maintenance to the walls are therefore redundant and can be removed.
of buildings, we need more information in order to navigate Anotherimprovementistotakeouttheshortedges.Thisisa
throughabuilding,aboutthetopologicalrelationships:connec- more difficult procedure, as the edges cannot just be removed
tivity of rooms, corridors, stairs, elevators. A conversion thus from the diagram, like what was done in the previous step
has to be made from the CAD representation to a topological with the end nodes, in this case, the edges will have to be
representation consisting of nodes and links between these reconnectedafterremoval.Usingtheconnectivityinformation
nodes, resulting in a tree-like data structure, called a graph, calculated before, the edge connecting to this short edge is
ideal for calculating the desired route. The different elements determined.Theendpointofthisedgewillchangetothenon-
on the map (corridors, rooms, stairs and elevators) are each common node of the short edge. A smoothing of the line is
represented by a node. The link between nodes, also called hereby acquired. To make sure this process does not disturb
edge, is a line on which a user can traverse the distance other edges, the node that is changed, cannot be a junction
between these two nodes. A link between different nodes can node connecting 3 edges.
onlyexistifitispossiblefortheusertomovebetweenthem.In After this pruning process, the amount of edges is brought
otherwords,alinkmaynotpassthroughwallsetc.Thegoalof down to a total of 175, as indicated in Figure 2 (b).
mapgenerationistogeneratesuchatopologicalrepresentation As a last step, the input of possible destinations is also
of the building. automated.Inaspecialinputmode,itispossibletoindicatea
A first option is to manually input the coordinates of the desired destination on the map; subsequently an input dialog
different nodes inside the building, and possibly extra infor- will be displayed to describe the new destination. This infor-
mation concerning these nodes, like the name of the room, in mationwillbeusedforfuturenavigationandissynchronized
atextfile,whileedgesconnectingthesenodesareincludedin throughouttheapplication,fromthelistofdestinations,tothe
another text file. info icons on the map.
The application reads these text files and creates the graph
structure with this information. Although this approach gives 3.1.2 Routing
the best result concerning the quality of the graph (minimum The advantage of this representation, using a graph, is that
amountofnodes+straightlines),especiallyforlargebuildings, routing algorithms can be used to calculate the optimal route
this asks for far too much manual input. to a certain destination. Because a route consists of nodes and
Totacklethisproblem,theVoronoidiagramisused.Thisso- the corresponding edges between them, each route has a total
lutioniswidelyusedforspatialrepresentations,autonomously cost indicating the distance it takes for the user to get to his
created by mobile robots, to plan a path through the building destination. Obviously we want to keep this cost as low as
[12].However,itcanalsobeappliedhere,usingthecoordinates possible; therefore we calculate the route with the lowest cost
of the walls as input to the Voronoi algorithm. The basic using routing algorithms like Dijkstra, Ford-Bellman and A*.
principle of Voronoi is the following: given a set of input Acomparisonbetweenthedifferentalgorithmsismadein[4],
points,Voronoiwillcreatecellsaroundthesepoints,wherethe resulting in a preference for Dijkstra, because of its ability to
distance to this input point is smaller then to any other. The alwaysfindtheshortestpath,aswellaskeepingthecomplexity
edgesofeachcellrepresentalinewhereeachpointonthisline limited.
isequidistantfrom2inputpoints.Theselineswillcorrespond
totheedgesofthegraph.TheVoronoinodesrepresentapoint 3.1.3 Weights
that is equidistant from 3 input points; these will correspond The weight of each edge is determined by the length of the
to the nodes in the graph. edge.Thisisjustabasicimplementationoftheweightscheme,4 PAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011
The main distinction between a simple geometric map
matching (MM) algorithm and a topological MM algorithm is
the fact that topological algorithms use extra information, like
historical data (the previously matched edge) or topological
information about the graph, like connectivity of edges. For
this MM algorithm, the heading of the person is used, esti-
matedfromthedigitalcompassofthesmartphone.Topological
information will be used from the graph representing the
building.ThecorefunctionalityofaMMalgorithmismatching
the estimated position on this graph, where the difficulty lies
in selecting the correct edge. A few steps are performed to
calculate the edge with the highest likelihood.
First,theclosestnodetotheestimatedpositioniscalculated.
The edges that are connected to this node will be selected as
candidateedgesforthemapmatchingalgorithm,thusinclud-
ing topological information. For each edge in this selection, 3
differentweightsarecalculated,concerning:theperpendicular
distancefromtheestimatedpositiontothisedge,thedifference
in heading between the person and this edge, and finally the
relative position of the estimated position to the edge. The
following weighting scheme is constructed:
W T =A PDW PD+A HW H+A RPW RP (1)
Where A PD, A H and A RP represent the weighting factors,
used to indicate the importance of each weight.
(a)Voronoidiagram (b)Pruneddiagram
Fig.2. Mapgeneration
as this provides for several other possibilities. One example is
to give stairs a higher weight, in order to limit the amount of
stairs to be climbed by the user. The routing algorithm will
then try to avoid this part of the building, as long as there
is an alternative route with a smaller total cost. This could
help disabled people navigate through a building. A second
example would be to use user levels with corresponding
privileges. A visitor might not be allowed to pass through Fig.3. Relationshipbetweenestimatedpositionandedge
certain parts of a building.
• The first weight consist of the perpendicular distance
betweentheestimatedpositionandtheedge.Thisweight
3.1.4 Mapmatching
indicates the proximity of the edge, the smaller the dis-
Another advantage of representing a map using nodes and tance, the higher the weight will be. To calculate this, the
links is the ability to perform map matching. Originally following formula is used:
used for outdoor road-navigation [13], this technique has also
proven its use for indoor navigation [11], [4]. Because the W PD =D (2)
calculatedpositionofauserispronetoerror,itisdesirableto
(cid:40) 1, d<2m
mapthewrongpositiontotheexpectedpathtobefollowedby
and D= 1−0.07∗(d−2), 2m≤d≤30m
theuser.Asanexample,consideravehicledrivingonaroad.
−1, d>30m
Thecalculatedpositionofthisvehicleislikelytodeviatefrom
this road, but because we know it is (normally) impossible to A PD representstheweightingfactor,usedinequation(5),
drive off the road, we can correct the position and map it to to indicate the importance of each weight.
the right location. A lot of research has been done regarding • Difference in heading between the edge and the person.
this topic, mainly with the focus on outside road networks, The current heading of a person is a good indicator of
butthistechniquecanalsobeusedinsideabuilding.Herethe where he is going, and what edge to select for naviga-
edgesandnodesaretheequivalentofroadsandintersections. tion. The heading provided by the digital compass of he
In the research conducted by Quddus [13], a distinction is smartphone is denoted as β , whereas the heading of the
made between 4 different types of map matching algorithms: edge is determined from the graph and denoted as β’,
geometric, topological, probabilistic and advanced. The main thedifferencebetweenthem,∆β,isusedintheweighting
conclusionisthatforreal-timeapplications,likemynavigation formula:
app,thetopologicalalgorithmisdesirable;itsveryfast,dueto
itssimplicity,butalsoprovidesadequateresultsfornavigation. W H =cos(∆β) (3)PAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011 5
WhereA
H
istheweightingfactorand∆βisthedifference 3.2 GUI
in heading between the edge and the person. The lower Thegraphicaluserinterfaceisusedtodisplayalltheinforma-
the angle between them, the higher the weight will be. tion calculated in the previous sections, as well as gather user
• Position relative to the link. By calculating the smallest input to determine the desired destination.
angle between the estimated position and the edge, the
relativepositionisdetermined.Thesmallerthisangle,the
more likely this edge will be the resulting edge.
Therefore, following weight formula is used:
W RP =cos(α) (4)
Theweightingfactorscanbeusedtoindicatetheimportance
of each individual weight, as indicated in equation (1). In
the research conducted by Quddus [2], It is determined that
the heading is the most important weight, followed by the
relative position and then the perpendicular distance as the
least important one, which gives the following values:
A H =3 (5a)
A RP =2 (5b)
A PD =1 (5c)
Theedgewiththelargestweightsisselectedastheresulting
edge.
(a)Standardmapview (b)Rotatedmapview
Alaststepistodeterminethepositiononthisedge.Tokeep
thealgorithmsimpleandfast,anordinaryprojectionfromthe Fig.4. Mapdisplay
position onto this edge is used as the mapped position. By
usingextrainformation,likespeed,thepositioncanbemapped Themapisbuiltupdynamically,usingatextfile,containing
more accurately on the edge, but this also requires more the coordinates of the walls inside the building. As stated be-
computation,whereas,especiallyforindoornavigation,where fore,amessagehandlerisusedtoreceiveupdates,concerning
the edges are rather small, this does not provide significantly the users current position, as well as the calculated route to
better results. be taken. Whenever a new message is received, the GUI is
Toimprovetheperformanceofthealgorithm,historicaldata updated accordingly. The position is indicated as a point on
about the previous mapping is used, to determine whether the screen, with a fan displaying the current heading of the
the current estimated position still fits on the same edge. 2 user.Thiswillhelptheusertogethisbearings.Atthebottom
conditions are used to check for this: has the person made a of the screen, turn-by-turn directions are drawn, to help the
turn,orhashecrossedajunction.Tocheckthefirstcondition, user navigate through the building as indicated in Figure 5
the difference in heading is calculated. If it exceeds 45, it is (b).Touchcontrolsareimplementedtoprovideuserinteraction
assumed that the person has made a turn. To check whether withthemap.Bydraggingonthescreen,theusercanpanthe
a junction is crossed, the relative position to the link is calcu- map.Additionally,zoomcontrolsareprovidedatthebottomof
lated. If this angle exceeds 90, it is assumed that the person thescreen.Totherightofthesezoomcontrols,thereisabutton
has crossed a junction. If any of these 2 conditions is met, tochoosebetweenstandardmapviewasshowninFigure4(a),
the algorithm goes back to calculating the closest node, and andaviewthatrotatesaccordingtotheheadingoftheuser,as
starts all over again, otherwise, the position is mapped on the indicatedinFigure4(b).Anextrabutton,onlyprovidedduring
previous edge. navigation, is located to the left of the zoom controls. This is
Nowthatwemappedtheuserscurrentpositiontoanedge, the overview button. Whenever a user starts navigation, the
we can use this as the source for our routing algorithm. As screen will zoom in on his current location, and it will follow
stated before, the user is able to select his desired destination him during navigation. This button allows the user to switch
from a list of predefined destinations. back to standard map view at all times, to get an overview of
Oncetherouteiscalculated,theGUIisupdatedaccordingly, the building.
and the route is drawn onto the map. There are 3 possible ways for a user to select a destination.
The first one is by selecting it from a list of all possible
destinations, retrieved from the database. Alternatively, the
3.1.5 Directions
usercantaptheinfoiconslocatedonthemap.Thiswillcause
To improve the user experience, and help the user find his a popup to appear, containing more information about the
destination as easy as possible, turn-by-turn directions are place, as well as the possibility to select it as the destination
provided during navigation. Using the built-in compass, the for routing. Finally, the user can choose to select a dynamic
heading of a person is used to indicate the direction to walk. destination.
As shown in Figure 5 (b), the direction is indicated using
an arrow at the bottom of the screen, accompanied by a 3.2.1 Dynamicdestination
textualinstruction.Inadditiontothesevisualdirections,voice Destinations inside a building are fixed; a user can choose to
instructions are also provided. navigate to an office, or a conference room. These locations6 PAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011
dont change. When a user wants to navigate towards another 3.3 Communicationgateway
person, his destination will probably be linked to his office, To retrieve a position from the server, the first step will be
but of course this person is not always inside his office. His to read the sensor data needed for the localization. This raw
position inside the building changes, making the destination sensor data has to be formatted into packages that can be
dynamic.Tocopewiththischange,thesystemmustbeaware read by the localization system. As a response, the estimated
of a change in the persons position. position of the user will be received. To keep the application
One possibility is to link the person with the localization responsive,thecommunicationwith thelocalizationsystemis
system, and share its location with other users. This approach moved from the main application thread onto a child thread.
is a bit to drastic, to provide this real-time localization, the Usingamessagehandler,synchronizationisaccomplishedbe-
person has to be connected with the system at all times, even tweenthechildthreadandthemainGUIthread,sowhenever
thoughhehimselfisnotusingit,becausehedoesnotwantto a new position is received, the GUI is updated accordingly.
navigate through the building.
Anotherapproachistheconnectionwithsocialmedia,based 4 TOOLS AND SIMULATION
on location sharing used by services like Foursquare [14] and TheapplicationisdevelopedfortheAndroidOSandistested
Facebook places [15]. using an HTC Desire HD running Android 2.2. Hardware
My choice of social media went to Twitter, mainly because requirements depend on the localization system used, i.e. for
of it simplicity. Tweets, the text-based posts a user can share Wi-Fi localization systems, the device must support a Wi-
with his followers, are limited to 140 characters. Fi connection. Turn-by-turn instructions during navigation re-
Thegeneralideaisthatausercantweethiscurrentlocation quire the heading of the user, and thus the requirement of a
by clicking on his position on the map. A dialog will be built-in compass.
displayedwiththecomposedtweet,e.g.Timisat#E23#citnav,
and the question whether to post it online.
The reason the hash tags are included in the message, is
to identify the topic of the message. When other users want
to navigate towards this person, they just have to search for
tweetscontainingthehashtag#citnav,andwillgetalistofall
users that shared their location.
There are thus two different connections with Twitter: the
first one allows the user to tweet his current location, which
requires him to login with his Twitter account. The second
connection does not require the user to login, because it just
lists all the tweets that contain hash tag #citnav, as indicated
inFigure5(a)Subsequentlytheusercanselectthetweetfrom
the person he wants to navigate to. This tweet is then parsed
for the other hash tag, containing the location, which is then
used for navigation. It is also possible for the user to search
(a)GeometricMM (b)TopologicalMM
through the list, to find the person he is looking for.
Fig.6. Mapmatching
5 RESULTS
Theroutingalgorithmhasproventoprovidetheshortestpath
tothedesireddestinationatalltimes.Furthermore,therouteis
updatedinstantly,asanewpositionisreceivedfromtheserver.
AsindicatedinFigure2,thepruningprocessseverelyreduces
the complexity of the graph, by removing redundant edges.
This pruning process does take some time; the application
takesabout5secondstostartup.Duringthisstart-upprocess
however, everything concerning the generation of the map,
fromreadingthe coordinates ofthewallsfromthe textfile,to
generatingtheVoronoidiagramandfinallyexecutingtheprun-
ing process, is performed, so it will only happen once in the
lifecycle of the application. Figure 6 illustrates the importance
of a topological map matching algorithm. Using the heading
of the digital compass, false mappings are prevented and the
correct edge is selected. This is an important step, especially
when you consider the low accuracy of indoor localization
(a)Dynamicdestination (b)Routedisplay
systems. The estimated position is prone to error and will
therefore differ from the actual position of the user. Using
Fig.5. Routing
the topological map matching process, these false positions
can be mapped to the correct edge. Another advantage of thePAPERSOFTHEE-LABMASTER’STHESES2010–2011 7
availabilityoftheheading,isthepossibilitytodisplaydetailed [12] J. Wallgru¨n, “Hierarchical voronoi-based route graph represen-
turn-by-turn instructions as indicated in Figure 5 (b), in order tations for planning, spatial reasoning, and communication,” in
Proceedings of the 4th International Cognitive Robotics Workshop
to help the user reach his destination.
(CogRob-2004),2004,pp.64–69.
Experiments concerning the user experience are a bit more
[13] M. Quddus, “High integrity map matching algorithms for ad-
complicated, and are therefore still ongoing. We will have to vanced transport telematics applications,” Ph.D. dissertation,
performtestsusingindependentusers.Thefirstbasicrequire- 2006.
mentwillbeforthemtoreachtheirdesireddestination.Other [14] Foursquare,“foursquare,”https://foursquare.com/,May2011.
[15] Facebook, “Facebook places,” http://www.facebook.com/
aspects to this experiment are the usability of the application,
places/,May2011.
whichishighlysubjectiveanddependsontheusers.Therefore,
a wide variety of users will have to be tested.
6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Tim Nelen received his B.Sc. in Applied Engi-
The application provides the necessary elements needed for neering: Electronics-ICT in 2010 at the Artesis
navigation: map generation, map matching, routing, route University College of Antwerp and is currently
display and turn-by-turn instructions. However, the usability finishing his Master in Applied Engineering:
Electronics-ICTattheArtesisUniversityCollege
of the application is strongly dependent on the accuracy of
ofAntwerp.
the used localization system. In order to provide useful in-
structions for example, a minimum accuracy of around 5m-
10mwouldbeneeded,otherwise,theinstructiontakethenext
doorleft,wouldnotbeinterpretedcorrectly.Thisalsodepends
Ifyouwishtocitethispaper,pleaseusethefollowingcode:
on the building infrastructure. When testing this in an office
Tim Nelen and Maarten Weyn, Martin Klepal, Indoor naviga-
environment,itisverydifficulttoprovidecorrectinstructions,
tionforcomplexenvironments,MastersThesis,Departmentof
whereastestinginalargerenvironment,likeashoppingmall,
AppliedEngineering,UniversityCollegeofAntwerp,Belgium,
allowsforaloweraccuracyinpositioning,andtheinstructions
June 2011
will still make sense.
This will be the major challenge for the future, to cope
withthelowaccuracyofindoorlocalizationsystems.Another
futuresubjectwouldbetoseamlesslyswitchbetweenoutdoor
and indoor navigation. Integrate this in one big application,
providing navigation at all times, even when there might be
no localization available at some times.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Ruppel and F. Gschwandtner, “Spontaneous and privacy-
friendly mobile indoor routing and navigation,” in GI Jahresta-
gung,2009,pp.2574–2583.
[2] Y. Inoue, T. Ikeda, K. Yamamoto, T. Yamashita, A. Sashima, and
K. Kurumatani, “Usability study of indoor mobile navigation
system in commercial facilities,” in Proceedings of the Second In-
ternationalWorkshoponUbiquitousSystemsEvaluation(USE2008),
2008.
[3] C.Kray,K.Cheverst,M.D.Harrison,F.Hamhoum,andJ.Wagner,
“Towardsalocationmodelforindoornavigationsupportthrough
publicdisplaysandmobiledevices,”pp.83–92,2008.
[4] M.H.V.Le,D.Saragas,andN.Webbr,“Indoornavigationsystem
forhandhelddevices.”
[5] C. Lo, T. Lin, Y. Wang, Y. Tseng, L. Ko, and L. Kuo, “Using
intelligent mobile devices for indoor wireless location tracking,
navigation, and mobile augmented reality,” in IEEE VTS Asia
PacificWirelessCommun.Symposium(APWCS),2010.
[6] T. Gallagher, B. Li, A. Dempster, and C. Rizos, “A sector-based
campus-wideindoorpositioningsystem,”inIndoorPositioningand
Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2010 International Conference on. IEEE,
2010,pp.1–8.
[7] Widyawan,“Learningdatafusionforindoorlocalisation,”Ph.D.
dissertation,CorkInstituteofTechnology,2009.
[8] M.Weyn,M.Klepal,andW.Widyawan,“Adaptivemotionmodel
for a smart phone based opportunistic localization system,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Mobile entity lo-
calization and tracking in GPS-less environments. Springer-Verlag,
2009,pp.50–65.
[9] M. Weyn, “Opportunistic seamless localization,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion,UniversityofAntwerp,Mar.2011.
[10] A. Butz, J. Baus, A. Kru¨ger, and M. Lohse, “A hybrid indoor
navigationsystem,”inProceedingsofthe6thinternationalconference
onIntelligentuserinterfaces. ACM,2001,pp.25–32.
[11] P.Gillie´ron,D.Buchel,I.Spassov,andB.Merminod,“Indoornav-
igation performance analysis,” in Proceedings of the 8th European
NavigationConferenceGNSS,2004,pp.17–19.
View publication stats