See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261319725
Indoor positioning in cultural heritage: Challenges and a solution
Conference Paper · November 2012
DOI: 10.1109/EEEI.2012.6376935
CITATIONS READS
8 8,639
7 authors, including:
Tsvi Kuflik Joel Lanir
University of Haifa University of Haifa
296 PUBLICATIONS 4,812 CITATIONS 94 PUBLICATIONS 1,766 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Eyal Dim Alan J. Wecker
University of Haifa University of Haifa
17 PUBLICATIONS 233 CITATIONS 60 PUBLICATIONS 525 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Joel Lanir on 02 November 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.2012 IEEE 27-th Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel
Indoor Positioning in Cultural Heritage: Challenges
and a Solution
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir, Michele Corra’ Massimo Zancanaro,
Eyal Dim, Alan Wecker Tretec S.r.l. Oliviero Stock
The University of Haifa, Trento, Italy FBK-irst,
Haifa, Israel Povo, Italy
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il
Abstract— Museums are both appealing and challenging as an requirements of determining museum visitor’s location. The
environment for research with novel mobile technology. Over the required location accuracy may be about +/- 25 cm or so, and
years, quite a few research projects explored the potential of
location itself may not be enough when a system has to figure
novel technologies to support information delivery to museum
out automatically what is the specific object of interest, when
visitors. Having an accurate visitor position and orientation is a
objects sizes may be several centimeters wide. In these cases,
key factor in the success for offering an interesting and
personalized experience to visitors. Unlike outdoors positioning, orientation and line of sight are needed as well for
in spite of numerous technologies experimented with, there is no understanding the visitors’ point of interest. On top of these
prevailing indoor positioning solution. Each technology has its technological challenges, cultural heritage sites and especially
benefits as well as its limitations. In addition, museums have their
museums have their own constraints when it comes to
own constraints when it comes to installation of equipment in
installation of sensors in their environment. In general, sensors
their space. In the framework of the PIL project, a flexible “light
and other devices should be invisible and require little
weight” proximity based indoor positioning system was
developed and deployed at the Hecht museum, at the University maintenance, if at all. As a result, presently, there are no
of Haifa. The positioning system was subject to the inherent integrated solutions (even though bits and pieces exist) that
limitations of the basic measurement technology. The address all these requirements. This paper addresses the gap
implementation proposes a general framework for indoor
between rudimentary positioning and specific visitors’ needs;
positioning addressing these limitations by an abstract reasoning
bridging them by a framework that uses multiple techniques at
layer supported by a dialog with the user that is seamlessly
different levels of the system. All this is done while with the
integrated into a museum visitors' guide system.
technology being almost invisible to the visitors.
Index Terms—Indoor Positioning, Mobile, ZigBee, Software
hardware interaction II. INDOOR POSITIONING IN MUSEUMS
I. INTRODUCTION Over the years, a variety of technologies have been
experimented for indoor positioning in museums. Besides the
Museums are both a challenging and appealing arena for
need for high accuracy due to the density of objects, museums
experimentation with novel technologies. They are quite dense,
in general have additional challenging constraints regarding
full of interesting objects, and rich in information about them.
the installation of equipment (e.g. it should be invisible,
However, due to this richness, visitors to these sites may need
require light infrastructure and low maintenance). So far, no
help in traversing both the physical and the information spaces.
technology exists that answers all these requirements. Either
Given the density of objects, sometimes visitors cannot find
the system is visible, or it needs some maintenance, or it is not
their way easily to points of interest. Given the richness of the
accurate enough or it requires heavy cognitive attention by the
information, and their time constraints, visitors can access only
user (which may harm the cultural experience by requiring the
small part of the information that may be available about the
visitor to focus on the technology rather than on the museum
objects. The advent of novel mobile technology brought with it
content). Two types of technologies were widely
the notions of personalization and context awareness, as means
experimented with – Infra Red (IR) based positioning and
to avoid information overload in cultural heritage, hence recent
Radio Frequency (RF) based positioning. In addition to these
research prototypes of museum visitors guides [Stock et al.
two that were widely used, visual based positioning was
2007; Wakary and Hatala 2007; Kuflik et al. 2011] attempt to
experimented as well. IR technology was among the first to be
provide personalized context aware information to their users.
exploited in many projects [Oppermann and Specht 1999;
For such systems, pinpointing the location of the visitor is
Stock et al. 2007; Kuflik et al. 2011]. However, it requires
essential for providing high quality location aware services. It is
visible IR emitters, and a line of sight between the emitter and
also one of the major challenges these systems face, since in
the receiver. Moreover, IR signals are detected within a
spite of numerous attempts and a large variety of technologies
conical pattern from of the emitter, with limited control over
experimented with, there is still no definitive solution for the
the distance, hence emitters need to be well spaced (to avoidoverlapping). These constraints required fine tuning of IR experimented with combination of optical tracking and active
emitters’ parameters as well as users awareness of their RFID. Again, optical tracking is expensive and requires
existence. RF technology had many variants, some trying to complicated installation and line of sight to visible light
use whatever may be available like WiFi or cellular based sources the visitor is wearing, and as such, is quite
positioning, relying on a sort of triangulation, while others, challenging. Active RFIDs are cumbersome and have high
based on Ultra Wide Band (UWB), RF signal strength, energy consumption. Skibniewski and Jang [2006] explored
Bluetooth, imitating GPS satellites for indoor navigation, the use of ZigBee networks for tracking and monitoring
sensors over ZigBee and more applied specific technologies objects in ubiquitous computing, avoiding some of the RFID
for that purpose. Khoury and Kamat [2009] reviewed and limitations by using the capabilities of a sensors network. Our
analyzed RF based indoor positioning technologies. They also approach, described below, is similar to this one. Kray and
studied and compared three different wireless technologies Kortuem [2005] suggested an integrated approach to
(WiFi, UWB and Indoor GPS). They found that the Indoor positioning. At the very bottom there are sensors providing
GPS positioning technology is the most promising due to the positioning measurements that are used for inferring user
low level of uncertainty in the reported user position (1 to 2 position that may be approved or further refined by interaction
cm) compared to that of WLAN (1.5 to 2 m) and UWB (10 to with the user. Our work continues that approach.
50 cm). While WiFi and cellular equipment may be available,
its accuracy is not good enough for the museum and it may III. THE HECHT MUSEUM ENVIRONMENT AND VISITORS GUIDE
require additional installation of access points or cells for
The system has been developed and deployed at the Hecht
improving performance. UWB provides reasonable accuracy Museum at the University of Haifa, Israel, which has 4000
in the price of a challenging installation requirements (line of square meters of exhibitions area, with over 5200 exhibits,
sight is needed) and high cost. Indoor GPS that performed best mostly devoted to archeology in the Land of Israel. The
also requires line of sight and is expensive to install. They also project covered all the archeological sections of the museum.
concluded that further research is needed to evaluate the Fig. 1 provides a floor map of the museum that includes also
Figure 1: Hecht museum floor plan and points of interest (marked by red circles)
effectiveness of other feasible technologies, such as Radio the exhibits. Small red circles mark points of interest (to be
Frequency Identification (RFID) for high-precision indoor discussed later). A set of multimedia presentations about the
position tracking. The additional research is required mainly objects in every point of interest were generated. When a
due to current technology that either requires very close visitor that uses the system approaches a point of interest, the
proximity of few centimeters for passive RFID or up to 50 system automatically identifies the position and offers the
centimeters (too constraining) for active RFID or a few meters visitor (on a mobile device) a personalized selection of
presentations to choose from about the objects in that position
(too coarse grained). Wakkary and Hatala [2007]IV. THE PIL POSITIONING SYSTEM 1), while Blinds are carried by visitors (Fig. 2, bottom, left). B
Gateways are statically located in strategic positions in order
We designed our own solution that minimizes the
to cover the whole museum area with the minimum number of
installation complexity while providing acceptable accuracy of
devices. Blinds are the main components of the system and
being within 1.5 to 2 meters from the object of interest
perform the following tasks: (i) measuring proximity to
(illustrated by Fig. 2, bottom, left). The museum is equipped
Beacons, allowing the system to reason about the location of
with a Radio Frequency (RF) based positioning system relying
their carriers; (ii) measuring proximity to other Blinds
on a wireless sensor network (WSN) composed of RF devices
enabling inference of proximity among visitors; (iii) detecting
designed and produced by Tretec, an Italian SME. The WSN
short range voice level activity, a feature that can be used to
operates in the 2.4GHz ISM band and is based on the 802.15.4
assess the level of conversation among visitors as well as their
protocol, the underlying layer of the well-known ZigBee
proximity (people may have a face to face conversation only if
protocol. The WSN is formed by three different kinds of
they are close to each other); (iv) detecting orientation of
devices: static RF beacons (Fig. 2, top, right), small mobile
visitors, using embedded magnetometers, enabling the
wearable RF devices called Blinds (Fig. 2, top, left) and fixed
assessment of whether visitors are facing each other, the
RF to TCP/IP Gateways (Fig. 2 bottom, right). Beacons and
exhibits or standing back to back; and (v) detecting motion
Gateways have the same size and are roughly twice the size of
using embedded accelerometers. When a Blind is in proximity
a Blind (which is about a match box size). Beacons and Blinds
of a Beacon or another Blind, that Blind reports this
are battery powered (they can go sleep, thus preserving
information to the PIL sever through the nearest Gateway. The
energy, for most part of the time), while Gateways are mains
Gateways transfers the data reported by the Blinds and
powered, because they must be constantly active in receive
Beacons over a local area network to the PIL1's positioning
mode. Power consumption is an important issue since the
server. The position of the visitor is inferred by the Blind on
system requires a very low maintenance rate.
the basis of an embedded algorithm that elaborates actual and
historical data and filters spurious or weak information. The
PIL server parses filters and enhances the information,
determining the visitor’s position. (the process is illustrated by
fig. 3).
V. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
The system was designed to support the required accuracy
while adhering to the environmental constraints. In order to
avoid complicated installation requirements, the beacons were
designed to be small and operated by batteries: these features
gave the possibility to hide them in the exhibits or the ceiling,
to minimize maintenance effort, mainly battery replacement,
and to provide ease of reconfiguration through the wireless
network. Moreover the design focused on the Beacons' power
Figure 2: Positioning device and usage scenario
consumption: thanks to an appropriate firmware and hardware
Fixed Beacons
Communication design. Beacons last up to four months when powered by 2 C-
Gateway
Visitor with Blind size batteries, and are designed to be active only when there is
activity in the museum. Selecting among off-the-shelf 2.4 Ghz
antennas brought to the best tradeoff among the following
Proximity
Sensors and requirements: small dimensions of Beacons, proximity area
Positioning data
match and low power RF communication. Specific antennas
were selected according to the position of the beacons and the
Events /
Presentations and Requests desired coverage. RF parameters of the Beacons can be tuned
Information
through the wireless network itself to optimize coverage once
installed. High density surface mount technology and Li-Ion
User Data
batteries helped reduce the size of the Blinds and integrate all
Museum guide Positioning
server server the needed functionalities: accelerometer, compass, voice
PILF Miguusereu m3: VPisILito mr’su Gseuuidme vSiyssitteomrs Agrucihditee cstyusrtee m detection, battery recharge circuit.
After the positioning system was deployed, it presented the
Beacons are statically located at entrances and exits, as well following categories of challenges: accuracy, availability, and
as near relevant locations of interest in the museum (their
locations in the museum are indicated by the red circles in Fig.
1 http://cri.haifa.ac.il/project/pil/pil.htmlstability. By accuracy problem we denote that the system A database of elementary paths with relative distances and
didn't always provide the correct position within the specified maximum speed conceivable in the museum has been
allowances (~1.5m). Availability problems are defined as not prepared for the Hecht Museum and if the position of a visitor
providing results within a constrained time limit (~3 sec). is not coherent with their previous position according to this
Stability problems refer to not providing consistent results database, it is considered a system error. (Fig. 4 shows an
(especially when a user is in a borderline position). The interface view of a fragment of the Hecht museum where
problems in each of these categories can be further classified distances between Beacons are known).
as inherent, constrained, or implementation-related. Inherent Finally, after the system decides it detects the user at a point
refers to built-in barriers of such systems. For example, a of interest, it presents the user with a selection of nearby
RFID positioning system can't determine the line of sight (and objects on the handheld device. The user has to select a
obviously not which exhibit the user is looking at). specific object of interest, thus the last fine grained positioning
Constrained means that the selected technology has certain step is done through interaction with the user through the
limitations (i.e., a position can be determined only within visitors electronic guide.
~1.5m using specific RFID technology). Implementation
problems relate to the specific implementation of the system, VI. DEPLOYMENT AND FEEDBACK
such as bugs, ill-defined API, responsiveness, etc. There are
The system has been deployed in two stages: 1) an initial
many reasons for these problems, rooted in the specific
testing phase – with partial deployment and evaluation that
characteristics of the technology, as well as the specific
was followed by 2) a second final phase completing the
museum environments:
coverage of the museum. In both cases the guide was tested
 Transmission power setup, and thresholds as well as antenna with regular visitors. In the first stage 21 visitors were offered
reception patterns, affects the area where a Beacon is not
free use of the guide and were asked to fill in a questionnaire
detected by Blinds resulting in a “false negative” state as
at the end of their visit. In addition, log files with detailed
visitors are not detected at positions.
information of the visits were recorded. In the first phase,
 Human body shielding prevents detection by the Beacon and
about 20% of the museum floor area was covered by 26
might cause “false negatives”.
Beacons, marking 26 locations of interest in four exhibition
 Metal, ceiling and other RF reflective surfaces may cause
rooms. Analysis of recorded visit logs reveals that on average,
erroneous “false positive” detections in wrong places.
visitors visited 7.14 locations each, for 131.1 seconds in a
 Irregular antenna patterns may cause spikes of “false
location and watched 2.31 presentations per location (multiple
negatives” as well as “false positives”
multimedia presentations were available for each location).
The developed solution is formulated via a multi-layered On average a visit lasted 52.3 minutes. Visitors’ location
approach. On the hardware level (Beacons, Blinds, Gateways, using the positioning system was known 29.18% of the time –
antennas) it consisted of antenna type selection, individual when visitors were in the vicinity of objects of interest. This
configuration of Beacon transmission power, and physical analysis is drawn from the number of Blind messages with
location of Beacons and gateways. Beacon transmission power position received out of the total number of Blind messages
is constrained as follows: the higher the power the better the (Blinds transmit a message approximately every half second).
detection, while the drawbacks are interferences and false All were correct (no false positives) as system presentations
detections by Blinds while they are in nearby positions (the were always coherent with positions. If we add our knowledge
dense area seen in the lower left side of fig. 1 was extremely of user interaction (we assume that when a user is interacting
challenging in this respect). So the power levels were tweaked with the guide concerning an exhibit, or viewing a
in order to optimize the detection. Solutions at the firmware presentation related to an exhibit, he is at the relevant
level consisted of refining the algorithms used, to balance location), then, the visitor, for the application purpose was
relevant recent history with the latest signal detection data. “located” 43.89% of the total time. The difference between
Another element introduced at firmware level is “parasitic these two figures is because of persisting individual false
detection”: Blind A may be in close proximity to Blind B but negatives. These numbers make sense, since as noted above,
not detected at any specific position, while Blind B may be only selected areas of interest in the museum (20%) were
detected at a certain position; thanks to the Blind proximity covered (naturally, visitors spent more time in areas where
feature described above, we infer that A is at the same position they could get information). When visitors were walking
as B. between areas of interest, or when they stood in front of
While the above limits the problem of “false negatives”, it exhibits that were not covered, no precise location data was
does not deal with reflections and irregularities of antenna available. In this evaluation we only examined individual
patterns. To solve this we introduced a software filtering layer visitors, so parasitic detection” could not be exploited.
whose purpose was to use the known spatial layout of Beacons Following the visit, visitors indicated (using a 7-point
to reduce false detections. The reasoning in this layer is based Likert scale) that the use of the guide was easy and intuitive
on the time it takes a user to move from one place to another. (avg. 5.6; 17 out of 21 visitors agreed with this statement), ithelped them improve their visit experience (avg. 5.9), and that solutions must be tailored in such layered approach – the
they would like to use such a guide in future visits (avg. 6.1). technological solution selected needs to be enhanced with
While we didn't ask directly about positioning satisfaction reasoning mechanisms and finally, get the visitor involved for
(because users were not aware of using a “positioning resolving ambiguities. Such an approach may enable us to
system”), we assume that satisfaction of the positioning is accommodate different requirements and characteristics of
implicitly included in the general satisfaction and usability of different indoors settings, while allowing easy integration of
the system. Hence, regarding accuracy, availability and various technological solutions as they become available, until
stability discussed earlier, the suggested layered approach, there is a generic acceptable solution – similar to the situation
seems to be an acceptable solution. in outdoor GPS.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The system is in place for more than two years and used by
visitors on a daily basis for more than a year and a half. The
solution that was developed appears to be a good compromise
between the accuracy requirements of the application and the
constraints of the museum environment. The selected
positioning solution that combines proximity based
positioning and fine grain positioning as part of the interaction
with the visitor proved to be easy and intuitive. From both
aspects: accuracy and maintainability, the system is
functioning well and proved to be a good, working solution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work was supported by the collaboration project
Figure 4: Configuration interface view
between the Caesarea-Rothschild Institute at the University of
In the second evaluation, a total of 251 visitors were
Haifa and FBK/irst and by FIRB project RBIN045PXH and by
included (data collection is continuing). Average visit time in
the Israeli Science Foundation grant ISF 226/10.
the museum was 65 minutes. On average, visitors spent 89.9
seconds in a location (SD=57.8), and visited on average 16.03 REFERENCES
locations (SD=7.3) per visit. According to the questionnaires, [1] Khoury, H. and Kamat, V. Evaluation of position tracking technologies for
visitors were satisfied with the technology (5.94), felt that they user localization in indoor construction environments, Automation in
Construction 18, 4 (2009), 444–457.
learned a lot (5.90) and in general were happy with the visit
[2] Kray, C. and Kortuem, G. Towards an integrated approach to positioning.
(6.23).
In proceedings of Workshop on Spatio-Temporal Reasoning, at IJCAI'05.
Edinburgh, Scotland. (2005).
VII. DISCUSSION [3] Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Gorfinkel, A., Jbara, S., Kats, S.,
Sheidin, J. and Kashtan, N. 2011. A Visitor’s Guide in an “Active
This work demonstrates how museum challenges can be
Museum”: Presentations, Communications, and Reflection. ACM Journal
addressed by a specific technological solution and how the of Computers and Cultural Heritage, 3(3) article 11
limitations of indoor positioning technology can be addressed [4] Oppermann R. and Specht M. A Nomadic Information System for
by a multi-layer architecture. Inherent hardware limitations are Adaptive Exhibition Guidance. In Bearman, D. a Trant, J. (eds.) Cultural
Heritage Informatics: selected papers from ICHIM 99 (1999) 103-110.
addressed by higher levels of logic – embedded firmware,
[5] Serrell, B. (1997). Paying attention: The duration and allocation of
positioning reasoning software, the user interface and finally,
visitors' time in museum exhibitions. Curator: The Museum Journal,
the user is involved in selecting a specific exhibit of interest 40(2), 108-113.
within a larger area pointed by the positioning system. For this [6] Skibniewski, M.J. and Jang, W.S. Ubiquitous computing: object tracking
and monitoring in construction processes utilizing ZigBee networks,
latter point the importance of good navigational aids with fast
Proceedings of the 23rd International Symposium on Automation and
and meaningful feedback to the user must be emphasized. It
Robotics in Construction (ISARC), Tokyo, Japan, (2006) 287–292.
should help the user continuously understand what [7] Stock O., Zancanaro M., Busetta P., Callaway C., Krüger A., Kruppa M.,
information is available in his vicinity (and beyond) and at the Kuflik T., Not E. and Rocchi C., Adaptive, intelligent presentation of
information for the museum visitor in PEACH. User Modeling and User-
same time provide intelligent means for interaction with the
Adapted Interaction. 17 3 (2007) 257-304.
positioning system. Currently, when there is no satisfying
[8] Wakkary, R. and Hatala, M. 2007. Situated play in a tangible interface and
indoor positioning solution (highly accurate, invisible and adaptive audio museum guide. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 11, 3 (2007),
with little infrastructure and maintenance requirements), 171-1
View publication stats