Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
Indoor User Localization for Rapid Information Access and
Retrieval on Construction Sites
H Khoury1, V Kamat2
1 University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
2 University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
hkhoury@umich.edu
Abstract. Manual search of project information on construction sites is a tedious and time-
consuming process. Evolving technologies such as location-aware computing offer significant po-
tential of improving such processes and supporting important decision-making tasks in the field.
For example, rapid and convenient access to contextual project information, through continuous
position tracking of engineers, managers and inspectors, can lead to significant cost and time sav-
ings due to the accuracy and immediacy with which relevant project information can be made
available to field personnel . Considering the spatial expanse and dynamic nature of typical con-
struction projects, mobile users need to be constantly tracked outdoors as well as indoors. The
Global Positioning System (GPS) is an attractive option for outdoor applications, but is not suitable
for indoor applications because it needs a clear line-of-sight to the satellites in order to track posi-
tion. As a result, alternate means to detect users’ location in indoor environments without relying
on GPS are needed. This paper presents research that is studying indoor wireless technologies for
dynamic user position tracking. Three technologies, Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN), Ul-
tra-Wide Band (UWB), and Indoor GPS position systems are evaluated and compared.
1 Introduction
Field construction tasks such as inspection, progress monitoring and others require access to a
wealth of project information. Currently, site engineers, inspectors and other site personnel,
while working on construction sites, have to spend a lot of time in manually searching into
piles of papers, documents and drawings to access the information needed for important deci-
sion making tasks. Evolving technologies such as location-aware computing offer significant
potential of improving such processes and supporting important decision-making tasks in the
field. Instead of requiring browsing through detailed drawings and other paper based media,
contextual project information can be automatically retrieved by continuously and accurately
tracking the mobile users‟ spatial parameters (Khoury & Kamat, 2008). Therefore, the con-
cept of context-aware information delivery (Aziz et. al., 2005) encompasses the creation of a
user centered mobile dynamic indoor and outdoor work environment, which has the ability to
deliver relevant information to on-site mobile users by intelligent interpretation of their spatial
context so that they can make more informed decisions (Schilit et al., 1994). Global Position-
ing System (GPS), being a satellite-based navigation system, works satisfactorily outdoors but
lacks support indoors and in congested areas. In addition, unlike outdoor areas, the indoor en-
vironment imposes different challenges on location discovery due to the dense multipath
effect and building material dependent propagation effect (Tadakamadla 2006). There are
many potential technologies and techniques that have been suggested to offer the same func-
tionality as a GPS indoors, such as Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN), Ultra-Wide Band
(UWB) and Indoor GPS. By tagging users with appropriate receivers/tags and deploying a
number of nodes (access points, receivers, transmitters, etc.) at fixed positions indoors, the lo-
cation of tagged users can be determined and continuously tracked.
497Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
The objectives of the paper are to present three key positioning technologies applicable in-
doors, portray the features of these techniques through several conducted experiments, and
highlight the extent to which each one can be used to accurately calculate the position of a us-
er in congested harsh environments and situations such as those found on construction sites.
The experimental results demonstrate the ability of Indoor GPS, in particular, to estimate a
user‟s location with a high degree of accuracy (1 cm).
2 WLAN Based User Position Tracking
In the last few years, Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) radio-signal-based positioning
system, supported by underlying transmission technologies Radio Frequency (RF) and Infra
Red (IR), has seen enormous expansion and it will continue this trend due to the fact that it is
an economical solution providing convenient connectivity and high speed links, and can be
implemented simply in software (Hightower & Borriello, 2001). Additionally, WLAN covers
a large area and is not restricted to line of sight. Wireless networks can support large numbers
of nodes and large physical areas by adding access points to extend coverage. Therefore,
WLAN allow users to be truly mobile as long as the mobile terminal is under the network
coverage area. Additionally, the distance over which RF and Infra Red IR waves can commu-ME
nicate depends on product design (including transmitted power and receiver design) and the
propagation path, in particular in indoor environments. Interactions with typical building ob-
jects, such as walls, metal, and even people, can affect the propagation of energy, and thus
also the range and coverage of the system. IR is blocked by solid objects, which provides ad-
ditional limitations. For that reason, most wireless LAN systems use RF, because radio waves
can penetrate many indoor walls and surfaces. The range of a typical WLAN node is about
100 m (Wang & Liu, 2005). Coverage can be extended, and true freedom of mobility
achieved via roaming. This means using access points to cover an area in such a way that their
coverages overlap each other. Thereby the users can navigate around and move from the cov-
erage area of one access point to another without even knowing they have, and at the same
time seamlessly maintain the connection between their node and an access point.
WLAN is appealing because it allows enhanced connectivity and is particularly useful when
mobile access to data is necessary. Additionally, user flexibility and portability can easily be
reconfigured while requiring no cable infrastructure (CISCO 2002). For the above reasons, it
was studied for the purpose of the proposed methodology. A proper WLAN architecture
framework provides a structure to develop, maintain and implement an acceptable operation
environment and can support implementation of automated testbed experiments conducted to
continuously track mobile users. One set of experiments to obtain location information in this
study were based on a WLAN based position system called the Ekahau Positioning Engine
(EPE) from the Finnish company Ekahau Inc. (Ekahau 2004).
Being the centerpiece of the Ekahau tracking system, EPE is a WLAN positioning system
made for indoor and campus areas (Ekahau 2004) where GPS does not perform adequately.
The solution requires no proprietary WLAN base stations and it does not need to know the lo-
cation of the base stations. EPE uses a patented process called SiteCalibration to create a
model of the desired space. The underlying approach used for the calibration process is the
fingerprinting technique. Areas/rooms are scanned and Radio Frequency (RF) parameter mea-
surements (power loss, multipath phase, etc.) are recorded. Then the measurements with their
location are saved to a database/Ekahau engine (i.e. Received Signal Strengths indicate power
loss and this loss is translated into location). When a mobile device moves in the area, it re-
ports its RF parameter measurements to the EPE. Then the device location is estimated by
498Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
matching the RF parameters against the location fingerprints in the database. The software
uses certain patented algorithms and scene analysis on the signals to compute a location esti-
mate. The whole process results in a positioning estimate that can be as accurate as 1 to 2
meters under optimal conditions (LaMarca et.al. 2005).
Having the positioning model created and calibrated, the positioning engine tracks the real
time position of a WLAN-enabled mobile device (Figure 1). It discovers all the WLAN-
enabled devices using their IP addresses, and makes use of the signal strength measurements
as detected by the access points to determine the actual position (Aziz et.al. 2005).
Fig. 1. Ekahau Positioning Engine Mechanism
2.1 WLAN-based Localization Experiment
Experiment: Construction Engineering Laboratory, University of Michigan
A testing application was conducted indoors at the Construction Engineering Laboratory lo-
cated in the G.G. Brown building at the University of Michigan (Figure 2). The objective was
to real-time track a mobile user’s position and head orientation as s/he walked inside the la-
boratory. Three access points were used in this case.
Fig.2. Ekahau Calibration and Testing inside the Construction Laboratory (University of Michigan)
499Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
For that purpose, positioning information (X, Y, floor level) obtained from Ekahau JAVA
SDK (Ekahau 2004) and orientation information (roll, yaw, and pitch) obtained from a C++
TCM5 magnetic tracker-based application (Behzadan and Kamat 2006), were combined in a
single C++ application as reflected through the pseudo code shown in Figure 3.
 Initialize C++ tracker application function to start obtaining head orientation values (roll , pitch and
yaw)
 Get positioning values
1. Open pipe to invoke Ekahau JAVA SDK& Return pointer to a stream using _popen ()
2. Read output (X, Y, Floor level) of the invoked program using the reading access character
string mode “r”
 Output all positioning and head orientation values (X,Y,Floor level and roll, pitch, yaw)
 Close pipe using _pclose()
Fig.3. Pseudo Code for creating a pipe between two tracking applications (JAVA and C++)
In order to virtually visualize how the mobile user (the first author in this experiment) is
being continuously tracked in the laboratory using the obtained user’s position and head
orientation , a 3D environment that has sufficient underlying computer graphics support to
allow the manipulation of entities in a 3D scene was needed. A computer graphics technol-
ogy based on the concept of the Scene Graph, namely OpenSceneGraph (OSG) within
Visual C++ .NET, was adopted (Kamat 2003). Selected snapshots of virtual views taken
during the experiments, conducted on both the first floor (Construction Engineering Labor-
atory) as well as the second floor of G.G. Brown building are shown in Figure 4. The
results of the experiments indicate that the Ekahau tracking system overall achieves a posi-
tioning accuracy that is on the order of 2m.
500Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
Fig.4. Virtual Representations for Indoor Tracking of a Mobile User in First floor (top) and Second Floor
(bottom) of the G.G. Brown Building
3 UWB-Based User Position Tracking
The second tracking system evaluated in this research is the Sapphire DART Ultra Wideband
Digital Active Real Time Tracking system (Multispectral Solutions 2008). It is designed for
the tracking personnel and/or equipment. A system comprises of one processing hub, four or
more receivers, one or more reference tags, and multiple tags for individual assets (Figure 5).
Fig.5. Sapphire UWB Tracking System
The system uses short pulse or UWB technology to determine the precise location of UWB
radio frequency identification (RFID) tag and operates as follows:
Each tag repeatedly sends out a packet burst consisting of a short train of UWB pulses, each
pulse having an instantaneous bandwidth of over 1 GHz. Since individual tags are not syn-
chronous, and the packet bursts are of extremely short duration, the probability of tag packet
collision is very small allowing for the simultaneous processing of hundreds to thousands of
tags in a local area. These transmitted UWB pulse trains are received by one or more Sapphire
DART UWB receivers which are typically located around the periphery of the area of cover-
age at known locations. Reception by three or more receivers permits accurate 2-D
localization, while reception by four or more receivers allows for precise 3-D localization. If
only one or two receivers can receive a tag transmission, proximity detection can also be rea-
dily accomplished. Each receiver uses a highly sensitive, very high speed, short pulse detector
to measure the precise time at which a tag packet arrives at its antenna. The extremely wide
bandwidth of the UWB pulses permits the receivers to measure these times-of-arrival to sub
nanosecond precision. In order to determine the actual tag position from these measurements,
the Sapphire DART Hub/Processor, using calibration data from the Sapphire DART UWB ref-
erence tag, determines the differential times-of-arrival between receiver pairs from these
individual receiver measurements and implements an optimization algorithm to determine the
location using a multilateration technique. Since the speed of light is approximately 0.98 feet
per nanosecond, these differential times-of-arrival are readily converted into the appropriate
measurement distances.
501Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
3.1 UWB-Based Localization Experiments
Experiments at Disaster City - Texas A&M University, and National Institute of Standards and Technolo-
gy (NIST)
Disaster City is one of the most comprehensive emergency response training facility available
today. It is a 52-acre training facility designed to deliver the full array of skills and techniques
needed by urban search and rescue professionals. As part of the Texas Engineering Extension
Service (TEEX) at Texas A&M University, the facility features full-size collapsible structures
that replicate community infrastructure, including a strip mall, office building, industrial
complex, assembly hall/theater, single family dwelling, train derailment and three rubble piles
(TEEX 2004).
Many of the following indoor experiments were performed at Disaster City as part of the re-
sponse robot evaluation exercises for Urban Search-and-Rescue (US&R) conducted by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) team, of which the first author was a
member. These response robot evaluation exercises for US&R teams introduce emerging ro-
botic capabilities to emergency responders within their own training facilities, while
educating robot developers regarding the necessary performance requirements and operational
constraints to be effective (NIST 2007). Several of those exercises were specifically per-
formed at the maze in the assembly hall/theater (Figure 6).
Fig.6. Disaster City: a) Assembly Theater Location [TEEX 2007] and b) Maze
Six receivers were deployed in the hall as shown in Figure 7. Tags were placed on top of ro-
bots in order to track robot’s 3D location.
Fig.7. UWB tracking system at Maze (Disaster City)
502Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
TCP sockets were used to connect directly to the Hub and provide a quick and effective way
for accessing location information from a local computer/laptop. This was achieved by open-
ing a socket connection given the IP address of the hub and the port number, reading values
and then performing a string manipulation on the values obtained (Figure 8a.) to obtain the X,
Y, Z coordinates(Figure 8b.). Only values corresponding to a tag header R were extracted (n1,
n2, & n3).
Open socket connection “s” to Sapphire HUB (IP address and port number)
o Receive each position output string l from s
o If ( l contains tag header R meaning 3D readings X,Y,Z)
 Do a string manipulation and extract array s[i], a set of 3 position coordinates from
each string l
 Convert the array of position strings s to array of position integers f & Assign n1, n2,
n3 to each of the position integer values f
for( i=0 i=3)
string s[i] f[i]
n1=f [1], n2=f [2] & n3= f [3]
Fig.8. a) Output Results from Sapphire HUB (top), b) Pseudo Code to extract UWB position coordinates (bot-
tom)
The positioning values were then used together with orientation values received from the
TCM5 magnetic tracker and both were integrated in the tracking OSG application to visualize
(in 3D) how the robot is moving around the maze in real-time (Figure 9).
503Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
Fig.9. 3D OSG View of robot navigation inside the maze
The same experiment was carried out at NIST. Figure 10 is a 3D view of a mobile user walk-
ing inside the maze. The results of the experiments indicated that the UWB Tracking system
overall achieves an accuracy of about 30 cm.
Fig.10. 3D OSG View of a Mobile User Path Inside the Maze (UWB)
4 Indoor GPS-Based User Position Tracking
Indoor GPS is the third tracking system studied in this research. The system is mainly defined
by four or more transmitters and a receiver (Figure 11). A battery operated transmitter uses la-
ser and infrared light to transmit one-way position information and elevation from the
transmitter to the receiver. The receiver has photodiodes inside its module and senses the
transmitted laser and infrared light signals. With the addition of a second transmitter of
known location and orientation, users can calculate the position of the receiver in the base
coordinate system. By adding two more transmitters, the system will have four laser transmit-
ters having its accuracy maximized. The GPS-like navigation signal is transferred through a
wireless network connection providing mobility to the operator (Kang and Tesar 2004). As in
satellite-based GPS, this one-way signal path is created from transmitters to the receiver, al-
lowing an unlimited number of receivers to continuously and independently calculate
positions whenever two or more transmitters are in view. Basically, a receiver in the mea-
surement volume detects and processes the signals from each visible transmitter. The 3D
position of the optical receiver is then calculated by the process of triangulation. Triangulation
(Lähteenmäki et al., 2001) is used, if the angles to known locations are given. With two
known locations, the absolute position in 2D can be determined. The two angles are used to
determine the line-of-sights to each of the known locations. With the position of the locations,
these lines are unique in the two-dimensional space and intersect in the desired position.
Therefore, given the angular information from at least two transmitters and provided with the
position and orientation of each transmitter, a unique 3D position within the measurement vo-
lume can be calculated.
504Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
The indoor GPS eliminates the recurring problem of accidentally interrupting a laser beam
during measurement action that requires the operator to begin the measurement again.
Fig. 11. Indoor GPS Transmitter (left) and Receiver (right)
[Source:http://www.indoorgps.com/Technology/Hardware.aspx]
4.1 Indoor GPS-Based Localization Experiment
The experiment using Indoor GPS was conducted at NIST, specifically inside the maze at the
former NIKE missile base barracks building adjacent to the main NIST campus. The goal of
this experiment was to simulate a mobile user such as a construction engineer or inspector
moving around and surveying the building, and determine the extent to which user’s position
can be accurately and continuously tracked.
In this case, four transmitters were deployed inside and around the area of the maze as shown
in Figure 12 and one receiver and the orientation tracker were held by the mobile user as s/he
moved around. The user‟s position and orientation were continuously obtained from the In-
door GPS and magnetic tracker and the tracking values were used in the 3D OSG application
to visualize the path of the user inside the maze (Figure 13). The results of the experiments
indicate that the Indoor GPS tracking system consistently achieved a high accuracy of 1 to 2
cm.
Fig.12. Deployment of laser transmitters around the maze
505Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
Fig.13. 3D OSG View of a Mobile User Path Inside the Maze (Indoor GPS)
5 Conclusion
The research presented in this paper compared three different wireless technologies (WLAN,
UWB and Indoor GPS) that can be used for tracking mobile users on indoor construction
sites. In order to evaluate the technical features of these technologies and their applicability in
a context-aware information delivery framework, several validation experiments were con-
ducted at the University of Michigan, Disaster City (Texas A&M University), and NIST.
It must be noted that the decision on using one technology or another is based on important
technical criteria (calibration, line of sight, accuracy etc.) in addition to other logistic issues
such as availability, the prevailing legal situation, and the associated implementation costs.
Some of these criteria are summarized in Table 1.
However, in order to address the problem posed by the difficulties faced in the target operat-
ing construction environment, Indoor GPS positioning technologies provide the most promise
due to the high level of accuracy it achieves (1-2 cm) compared to the accuracy of WLAN and
UWB wireless technologies that provide a comparative accuracy of approximately 2m and 30
cm respectively (Table 1).
Table 1: Comparative Summary of Indoor Positioning Technologies
Accuracy Deployment
Line of Sight Requirement Calibration and Cost
Needed Needed
Very High Quite Easy but
(receiver- (few sampling
(1-2 cm) Expensive
Indoor GPS transmitter) points)
Needed
High Quite Easy but
( receiver- Not needed
(10-50 cm) Expensive
UWB reference tag)
Medium Needed Easy and
Not needed
WLAN (Ekahau) (1.5-2 meters) (time-consuming) Economical
References
Aziz, Z., Anumba, C.J., Ruikar, D., Carrillo., P.M., Bouchlaghem.,D.N. (2005), “Context-aware information de-
livery for on-Site construction operations,” 22nd CIB-W78 Conference on Information Technology in
Construction, Institute for Construction Informatics, Technische Universitat Dresden, Germany, CBI Publi-
cation No:304, pp:321-32
Cisco Systems. (2002). “Wireless Local-Area Networking”
Retrieved from http://www.sat-corp.com/products/PDF/CISCO_WLAN_Overview.pdf
506Intelligent Computing in Engineering - ICE08
Ekahau. (2004). http://www.ekahau.com
Hightower, J., and G. Borriello. (2001). “Location Systems for Ubiquitous Computing”, IEEE Computer,
34(8):57-66, Piscataway, NJ.
Behzadan A.H., and Kamat V.R. (2006). “GPS and 3DOF Angular Tracking for Georeferenced Registration of
Construction Graphics in Outdoor Augmented Reality”, 13th EG-ICE Workshop on Intelligent Computing in
Engineering and Architecture, Ascona, Switzerland.
Kamat, V. R. (2003). “VITASCOPE: Extensible and Scalable 3D Visualization of Simulated Construction Oper-
ations”. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA.
Kang, S., and Tesar, D. (2004). “Indoor GPS Metrology System with 3D Probe for Precision Applications”. In
Proceedings of ASME IMECE 2004 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and RD&D Expo.
Khoury, H. M., and Kamat, V. R. (2008). “High-Precision Identification of Contextual Information in Location-
Aware Engineering Applications”, Advanced Engineering Informatics, Elsevier Science, New York, NY.
(In Review).
Lähteenmäki, J., Laitinen, H., & Nordström, T. (2001). “Location Methods”. VTT Information Technology. Re-
trieved from http://location.vtt.fi/source/technologies.html
LaMarca, A., Hightower, J., Smith, I. and Consolvo, S. (2005). “Self-Mapping in 802.11 Location Systems” In
Proceedings of Ubicomp2005.
Metris Products, (2007). http://www.metris.com/large_volume_tracking__positioning/igps/
Multispectral Solutions, Inc.(2007). http://www.multispectral.com/products/sapphire.htm
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). http://www.nist.gov
Schilit, B.N., Adams, N., and Want R. (1994). “Context-aware computing applications.” Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications (WMCSA „94, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), 85–90.
Tadakamadla, Shashank .(2006). “Indoor Local Positioning System For ZigBee, Based On RSSI”, M.S. Thesis,
Department of Information Technology and Media, Mittuniversitetet, Mid Sweden University.
Texas Engineering Extension Service (TEEX). (2004).
http://www.teex.com/teex.cfm?pageid=USARprog&area=USAR&templateid=1117
Wang, J., and Liu, J. (2005). ``Interference Minimization And Uplink Relaying At 3G/WLAN," IEEE SAWN.
507
VViieeww ppuubblliiccaattiioonn ssttaattss