ARTIZT: Applying Ambient Intelligence to a
Museum Guide Scenario
Oscar García, Ricardo S. Alonso, Fabio Guevara, David Sancho,
Miguel Sánchez, and Javier Bajo*
Abstract. Museum guides present a great opportunity where the Ambient Intelli-
gence (AmI) paradigm can be successfully applied. Together with pervasive com-
puting, context and location awareness are the AmI features that allow users to
receive customized information in a transparent way. In this sense, Real-Time Lo-
cating Systems (RTLS) can improve context-awareness in AmI-based systems.
This paper presents ARTIZT, an innovative AmI-based museum guide system
where a novel RTLS based on the ZigBee protocol provides highly precise users’
position information. Thus, it can be customized the content offered to the users
without their explicit interaction, as well as the granularity level provided by the
system.
Keywords: Ambient Intelligence, museum guide, context-aware, location-aware,
Real Time Locating Systems, ZigBee.
Oscar García
School of Telecommunications, University of Valladolid, Paseo de Belén 15,
47011 Valladolid, Spain
e-mail: oscgar@tel.uva.es
Ricardo S. Alonso
Department of Computer Science and Automatic, University of Salamanca,
Plaza de la Merced, s/n, 37008, Salamanca, Spain
e-mail: ralorin@usal.es
Fabio Guevara · David Sancho
Nebusens, S.L. R&D Department, Parque Científico de la USAL, Edificio M2,
Calle Adaja s/n, 37185, Villamayor, Salamanca, Spain
e-mail: {fabio.guevara,david.sancho}@nebusens.com
Miguel Sánchez · Javier Bajo
Pontifical University of Salamanca, C/ Compañía 5, 37002, Salamanca, Spain
e-mail: jbajope@upsa.es
P. Novais et al. (Eds.): Ambient Intelligence - Software and Applications, AISC 92, pp. 173–180.
springerlink.com © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011174 O. García et al.
1 Introduction
Ambient Intelligence (AmI) systems have to take into consideration the context in
which they are used. That is, they must have context-awareness properties and
adapt their behavior without the need of users to make an explicit decision or in-
teract with them, allowing applications to be more usable and efficient [1]. People,
places and objects are recognized as the three main entities when dealing
with Ambient Intelligence [2]. The place where the user is and the objects that sur-
round him determine the behavior of the system, thus obtaining in a natural way
personalized, adaptive and immersive applications.
Mobile devices, such as smart phones, PDAs or tablets, offer a wide range of
possibilities to create new AmI-based systems. One important feature of these de-
vices is the ability to know their position, which includes the location of users
themselves and any other object that is part of the environment [2]. However, the
use of these devices on context-aware applications requires locating them more
precisely. In this sense, Real-Time Locating Systems (RTLS) acquire a great
importance in order to improve the applications based on the knowledge of the
relative position of each user or object at any time.
One of the areas of interest where AmI becomes more relevant is Museum
Guides applications [3]. Museum scenarios are environments where users receive
a wealth of information from many sources. New information and communication
technologies facilitate that the characteristics and related information about art-
works can be offered in a more understandable, attractive and easy way to visitors.
In this sense, the context information becomes relevant in order to personalize the
experience for every user at every moment [4]. Thus, RTLS are presented as a
resource that greatly improves context-awareness in AmI applications as these
systems provide the position of every static or dynamic object that interacts
throughout the scenario. There are different technologies that can be used when
designing and deploying an RTLS, such as Global Positioning System (GPS) [5],
Infrared (IR) Pointing Systems [6], Passive and Active Radio-Frequency Identifi-
cation (RFID) [7], Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) [8] or Near Field
Communication (NFC) [9].
There are several works that use RTLS to enhance the visitors experience in
museums [8,10]. The ultimate goal of all these approaches is to find an association
between the visitors and the art-work they are looking at a particular time. How-
ever, most of these solutions require a strong interaction between the visitors and
the technology. That is, visitors must be close enough to the art-work to be de-
tected, even bringing their devices to a particular object or waiting for other visi-
tors to finish their interaction. Furthermore, these approaches do not provide
enough accuracy to customize information with a high granularity level.
This paper describes ARTIZT, an innovative museum guide system in which
visitors use tablets to receive personalized information and interact with the rest of
the elements in the environment. An RTLS based on ZigBee is proposed in order
to improve context-awareness. This system achieves a location precision of less
than one meter. Thus, ARTIZT knows at every time how customized content must
be shown to the visitors, based on the area on which they are located. This way,ARTIZT: Applying Ambient Intelligence to a Museum Guide Scenario 175
visitors can naturally walk throughout the museum receiving relevant information
as they get closer to each art-work. With this approach, every art-work, zone or
important detail of the museum can be contextualized.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents existing mu-
seum guide works, as well as the shortcomings that motivate the development of a
new system. Then, Section 3 describes the basic components of ARTIZT, includ-
ing the most important locating and context management technologies involved on
it and how they are used. Finally, conclusions and future work are depicted.
2 Problem Description and Related Work
In recent years, ongoing advances in technology and communications have al-
lowed people to be surrounded by mobile devices. These devices are increasingly
powerful, easy-to-use and capable of communicating with each other in more in-
novative ways. These capabilities allow the creation of Ambient Intelligence sys-
tems: users' mobility is guaranteed and they are, day by day, more accustomed to
the use of technology for any task.
A museum scenario is an ideal environment where AmI can improve the way
the information is offered to visitors. AmI features encourage the creation of new
museums guide approaches where information is presented in a natural, personal-
ized and attractive way to users with a better human-machine interaction. This
way, as art-works are usually statically placed in the environment, the main goal is
how to detect where visitors are. If we can determine, as precisely as possible, the
position of the visitor inside the museum, we will be able to know the entire
context that surrounds him every time.
Multiple technologies can be used in order to determine the position of the visi-
tors. The ultimate goal of knowing the positioning of the visitors is to provide in-
formation, as accurate as possible, about the art-works they are watching. In this
sense, tagging the context and the use of RTLS are two widely used alternatives
[11]. Next, it is analyzed the most used technologies in both trends.
When talking about RTLS, the first technology that comes into our mind is
GPS. It has been used in context-aware tourist guides where users receive person-
alized information according to their position [12]. However, it only works out-
doors and it is not an appropriate technology to develop an indoor museum guide.
Some approaches try to solve indoor locating problem using combined technolo-
gies along GPS. Cyberguide [5] determines the users’ position by means of infra-
red sensors. However, it is needed a direct line of sight between user and sensors,
so it does not work properly in crowded environments. Exploring the use of infra-
red sensors, the HIPPIE system delivers information about the location of user in
relation to an object [6]. Visitors point the art-work (which is provided with an in-
frared detector) and the system knows where they are and provides the content.
Nevertheless, this solution requires a proactive user and, as mentioned before, di-
rect line of sight and proximity between user and object. The action performed by
the user when pointing the object (e.g., an art-work) is physically the same as is
done in solutions that use RFID [7] or NFC technologies [9]. Both technologies176 O. García et al.
follow the same pattern of performance: each object all over the museum is
tagged. RFID or NFC tags, containing a unique identification number, are placed
near the object. If visitors want to receive information about an art-work, they
have to place their device nearby the tag. Then, the system identifies the object
and loads the relevant information. The necessity of proximity between devices
and tags makes these solutions non-transparent to the user as it requires a direct
collaboration. Moreover, if multiple users want to see the information about the
same art-work, they must do it one by one at each time. Bluetooth solves the peer-
to-peer relation between RFID tags and users [14]. The Eghemon system uses
mobile phones that receive information via Bluetooth as users get closer to a piece
of information (e.g., an art-work). These pieces can offer information to multiple
devices simultaneously, but they must be close enough to them. If two pieces are
close enough, the mobile device can only receive information from just one of
them. Bluetooth can also be used to improve the devices locating. Bruns et al.
have designed a solution where a grid of Bluetooth emitters is deployed through-
out the museum, so the visitors’ mobile phones transmit their position to the
nearest emitter [10]. However, location is not as accurate as desirable, because the
system only knows which mobile phones are associated to an emitter. Further-
more, Bluetooth can only support the association of up to seven mobile phones
simultaneously to an emitter. The UbiCicero system [14] uses Active RFID to get
the position of the users. In this case, users carry an RFID reader that continuously
reads signals from active tags that are close to art-works. Active RFID technology
allows a better locating approach because users do not have to be as close as with
passive RFID technology to detect the object. However, location information is
not precise enough because the system only detects which art-work is closer the
users, so two objects that are close enough can cause interference and “confuse”
the system. It is also possible to locate mobile devices that provide information on
the museum via Wireless LANs. In this case, multiple Wireless LANs are created,
usually one network for each different zone. When visitors change from a zone to
another, devices automatically connect to an available network through which
contents are provided [8]. This solution presents several problems: different cov-
erage areas must not be overlapped; locating provides a poor precision (never gets
precision under 2 meters); and infrastructure deployment is a hard process since it
is needed a thorough calibration of all devices [13].
As can be seen along this section, there are many approaches that have been
considered to create museum guides. Analyzing all of them, two ways of tackling
the problem can be identified. The first one is the direct physical interaction
between the visitor and the art-work. The second one consists of obtaining infor-
mation without having a voluntary interaction by the visitor, where the system
automatically provides information depending on visitors’ location. ARTIZT
follows the second approach. The main objective is to make interaction as trans-
parent as possible to visitors. For doing that, it is very important that context in-
formation is precise enough. This way, an accurate location of visitors is the most
important aspect of this approach. Therefore, it is easy to know which elements
(i.e., art-work) surround each visitor, no matter several of these elements are
separated by a short distance between them. Thus, it is possible to get a wholeARTIZT: Applying Ambient Intelligence to a Museum Guide Scenario 177
description of the context that surrounds each visitor in a more precise way. Based
on the context information, the content provided to the visitors changes dynami-
cally. Next section describes the basic features of ARTIZT and the way it works.
3 ARTIZT: Ambient Intelligence Real-Time Locating System
Museum GuIde Over Zigbee Technology
The AmI paradigm proposes the development of applications that provide new
ways of interaction between people and technology, adapting them to the needs of
individuals and their environment [2]. ARTIZT (Ambient intelligence Real-Time
locating system museum guIde over Zigbee Technology) follows these premises
and offers personalized contents to the visitors in a transparent way according to
the context information.
The potential of ARTIZT lies in the precision with which contextual informa-
tion can be collected. In this sense, an innovative RTLS provides the system with
users’ positions with an error less than one meter, so it can be determined at any
time which art-works are on the visitors' radio of interest, thus adapting precisely
the information that it is provided to each user.
3.1 The Real-Time Locating System
The RTLS used is by ARTIZT is based on the novel n-Core platform [15], which
is intended to develop ZigBee applications and provides both wireless physical
devices and an Application Programming Interface (API) to access their function-
alities. A network of ZigBee devices must be deployed all over the museum. This
network is composed of a set of Sirius A (Figure 1 left) and Sirius Dongle devices
(Figure 1 right). The Sirius A devices are placed across the ceiling of the museum
(Figure 2), forming a network in which it is known the specific location of each
one, as well as the relative positions with each of its neighbors (i.e., closest
devices). The Sirius Dongle devices are inserted in tablet PCs that are carried by
the visitors. This way, the visitors can move freely through the museum.
Fig. 1 Sirius A (left) and Sirius Dongle (right) devices
All devices communicate via the ZigBee standard. ZigBee is a low cost, low
power consumption wireless communication standard, developed by the ZigBee
Alliance. It is based on the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol and operates at the178 O. García et al.
868/915MHz and 2.4GHz unlicensed bands. ZigBee is designed to be embedded
in consumer electronics, home and building automation or toys and games.
ZigBee allows star, tree or mesh topologies. Devices can be configured to
act as network coordinator (creates and controls the network) router
(sends/receives/forwards data to/from other devices) and end device
(sends/receives data to/from other devices in the network).
Over this network infrastructure it is implemented a locating engine that pro-
vides users positioning whose accuracy reaches less than one meter. The infra-
structure is completely dynamic and scalable so new devices can be added at any
time without affecting the rest of the network. The operation of the RTLS is very
simple. Visitors carrying mobile devices (i.e., tablets) move freely around the mu-
seum. The mobile devices send periodically a broadcast signal by means of the
Sirius Dongle connected to them. The signal is received by the Sirius A devices
placed all over the museum. The location engine, allocated in a central server, cal-
culates the positions of all Sirius Dongle devices and therefore the position of
every visitor. Once the system knows the location of each visitor, an application
installed on the devices of the visitors customizes the information which is
provided dynamically.
Fig. 2 Sirius A wireless network, Interest Areas and mobile device provided with Sirius
Dongle
3.2 Context Information Management
Once ARTIZT gets the position of the visitors, the information must be personal-
ized according to every visitor status. Each user carries a tablet on which it is
installed a light and user-friendly application developed specifically for the mu-
seum. Contextual information of the museum is included in this application so
that, from the position of the visitors, ARTIZT decides which information is
shown in the device. To do this it is created a map of the museum and, with theARTIZT: Applying Ambient Intelligence to a Museum Guide Scenario 179
location information received by the server, it is determined the location of visi-
tors continuously. In addition, each level of the museum is divided into "Interest
Areas" (see Figure 2). So when a user enters into one of these, the application cus-
tomizes all the information that is wanted to be shown to visitors. Reader can
realize that with a so precise RTLS, these areas can be as small as desired, so that
the system can provide enhanced context information and personalize it always in
a transparent way without any user interaction.
Tablets' application contains all the information that may be provided to users.
Thus, ZigBee network only carries data from the devices to the server, necessary
to calculate their position, and the location of the visitors from the server to the
tablets. These communications reduce traffic data and there are always alternative
paths in the network so fault tolerance increases and data loss is minimized.
ARTIZT is configured to provide the customized content. When the position of
the visitor is known, and using a series of data that is collected before the visitor
starts his route, the system is able to tailor the information that is being shown in
the form of content or language.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
Transparency and customized data is one of the keys in the development of AmI
applications. If these applications want to adapt their behavior depending on the
context that surrounds users transparently, it is important that users’ location is as
precise as possible.
Museum guides are a scenario where applying AmI techniques becomes more
meaningful: multiple contextual information that contains the museum and the
great mobility of the visitors make their location and the data filtering process
become challenges to solve in an efficient way.
ARTIZT is a museum guide system that includes AmI techniques. This system
makes use of a powerful RTLS to determine where visitors are. This RTLS, based
on an innovative ZigBee-based platform, provides high precision in the locating
process. Therefore, the information that surrounds each visitor at any moment can
be precisely determined and provided to them on real-time. The use of the ZigBee
network to transport locate information minimize data loss (visitors' devices con-
tains all the necessary information) and reduce the risk of disconnection, as there
are always alternative ways to reach the server over the ZigBee grid.
Future work on ARTIZT includes the use of sensors in order to determine any
information that may affect the context (temperature, pressure, humidity, etc.) and
estimate the direction of art-works and visitors through the use of compasses.
Combining the precise location information provided by the RTLS with the in-
formation from compasses it will be possible to determine where visitors are
looking at, enhancing the user experience.
Acknowledgments. This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation, Project T-Sensitive, TRA2009_0096.180 O. García et al.
References
1. Baldauf, M., Dustdar, S., Rosenberg, F.: A survey on context-aware system. Interna-
tional Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing 1(4), 263–177 (2007)
2. Weber, W., Rabaey, J.M., Aarts, E.: Ambient Intelligence. Springer-Verlag New York,
Inc., Heidelberg (2005)
3. Ramos, C., Augusto, J.C., Shapiro, D.: Ambient Intelligence—the Next Step for Arti-
ficial Intelligence. IEEE Intelligent Systems 23(2), 15–18 (2008)
4. Raptis, D., Tselios, N., Avouris, N.: Context-based design of mobile applications for
museums: a survey of existing practices. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
ference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices & Services, Salzburg,
Austria, September 19-22 (2005)
5. Abowd, D.A., Atkeson, C.G., Hong, J., Long, S., Pinkerton, M.: Cyberguide: a mobile
context-aware tour guide. Wireless Networks 3(5), 421–433 (1996)
6. Oppermann, R., Specht, M.: A context-sensitive nomadic exhibition guide. In:
Thomas, P., Gellersen, H.-W. (eds.) HUC 2000. LNCS, vol. 1927, pp. 127–142.
Springer, Heidelberg (2000)
7. Bellotti, F., Berta, R., De Gloria, A., Margarone, M.: Guiding Visually Impaired Peo-
ple in the Exhibition. In: Mobile Guide 2006, Turin, Italy (2006)
8. Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Smith, P.: Providing tailored Context-aware in-
formation to city visitors. In: Brusilovsky, P., Stock, O., Strapparava, C. (eds.) AH
2000. LNCS, vol. 1892, pp. 73–85. Springer, Heidelberg (2000)
9. Blöckner, M., Danti, S., Forrai, J., Broll, G., De Luca, A.: Please touch the exhibits!:
using NFC-based interaction for exploring a museum. In: Proceedings of the 11th In-
ternational Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Ser-
vices (MobileHCI 2009), Bonn, Germaby, pp. 71–72. ACM, New York (2009)
10. Bruns, E., Brombach, B., Zeidler, T., Bimber, O.: Enabling Mobile Phones To Support
Large-Scale Museum Guidance. IEEE Multimedia 14(2), 16–25 (2007)
11. Ghiani, G., Paterno, F., Santoro, C., Spano, L.D.: UbiCicero: A location-aware, multi-
device museum guide. Interacting with Computers 21(4), 288–303 (2009)
12. Park, D.-J., Hwang, S.-H., Kim, A.-R., Chang, B.-M.: A Context-Aware Smart Tourist
Guide Application for an Old Palace. In: International Conference on Convergence In-
formation Technology, November 21-23, pp. 89–94 (2007)
13. Zimmermann, A., Lorenz, A.: LISTEN: a user-adaptive audio-augmented museum
guide. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 18(5), 389–416 (2008)
14. Bay, H., Fasel, B., Van Gool, L.: Interactive museum guide. In: The Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Ubiquitous Computing UBICOMP, Workshop on Smart Envi-
ronments and Their Applications to Cultural Heritage (2005)
15. n-Core: A Faster and Easier Way to Create Wireless Sensor Networks (2010),
http://www.n-core.info (retrieved November 14, 2010)