Delft University of Technology
Position location, place and area, an indoor perspective
Zlatanova, Sisi; Sithole, George
DOI
10.5194/isprs-annals-III-4-89-2016
Publication date
2016
Document Version
Final published version
Published in
ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences
Citation (APA)
Zlatanova, S., & Sithole, G. (2016). Position location, place and area, an indoor perspective. ISPRS Annals
of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, III-4, 89-96.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-annals-III-4-89-2016
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
POSITION, LOCATION, PLACE AND AREA: AN INDOOR PERSPECTIVE
George Sitholea*, Sisi Zlatanovab
a Geomatics Division, School of Architecture, Planning and Geomatics, University of Cape Town, Private Bag X3, Rondebosch,
7701, South Africa, Email: george.sithole@uct.ac.za
b 3D Geoinformation, Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment, Delft University of Technology, Julianalaan 134, 2628 BL
Delft, The Netherlands, Email: s.zlatanova@tudelft.nl
Commission IV/WG IV/7
KEY WORDS: Indoor, Mapping, Modelling, Navigation, Application
ABSTRACT:
Over the last decade, harnessing the commercial potential of smart mobile devices in indoor environments has spurred interest in indoor
mapping and navigation. Users experience indoor environments differently. For this reason navigational models have to be designed
to adapt to a user’s personality, and to reflect as many cognitive maps as possible. This paper presents an extension of a previously
proposed framework. In this extension the notion of placement is accounted for, thereby enabling one aspect of the ‘personalised indoor
experience’. In the paper, firstly referential expressions are used as a tool to discuss the different ways of thinking of placement within
indoor spaces. Next, placement is expressed in terms of the concept of Position, Location, Place and Area. Finally, the previously
proposed framework is extended to include these concepts of placement. An example is provided of the use of the extended framework.
Notable characteristics of the framework are: (1) Sub-spaces, resources and agents can simultaneously possess different types of
placement, e.g., a person in a room can have an xyz position and a location defined by the room number. While these entities can
simultaneously have different forms of placement, only one is dominant. (2) Sub-spaces, resources and agents are capable of possessing
modifiers that alter their access and usage. (3) Sub-spaces inherit the modifiers of the resources or agents contained in them. (4) Unlike
conventional navigational models which treat resources and obstacles as different types of entities, in the proposed framework there
are only resources and whether a resource is an obstacle is determined by a modifier that determines whether a user can access the
resource. The power of the framework is that it blends the geometry and topology of space, the influence of human activity within sub-
spaces together with the different notions of placement in a way that is simple and yet very flexible.
1. INTRODUCTION 2013, Jung and Lee, 2015, Yang and Worboys, 2015 have
proposed similar models. While closer to the human perception
In recent years the mapping of enclosed environments has driven of space, these models have a weakness in that they do not discuss
researchers to develop novel methods of representing these the way humans perceive placement (how a thing occupies
environments. These representations are used in a variety of space), i.e., the conception of ‘Here’ and ‘There’.
applications, one of the most important applications being the
assisted navigation of indoor spaces. In contemporary navigational systems, travel between a start
point and destination are imagined to be movements between pin
A shortcoming of conventional indoor navigation aids is that they points in space. But as humans we seldom think in this way when
tend to be very functional and mostly designed to answer the travelling. Our conception of ‘Here’ and ‘There’ is more
basic question of ‘What is the best way to get from A to B?’. The complex. For example indoors a person goes from room 1.1, to
emphasis has been on solving the technical problem of navigation the second floor, to room 2.3, and stops at a photocopier. During
at the expense of resolving human needs and expectations. One this travel our conception of ‘Here’ and ‘There’ is expanded
consequence of this is that navigational aids simplify the full (floor) and contracted (photocopier) in response to the context of
range of human actions and conceptions during a navigation and the different parts of the journey. This paper looks at how best
focus on providing natural language directives, e.g., Chen and refer to this changing notion of ‘Here’ and ‘There’ into the model
Mooney 2011. of an indoor environment.
This paper concerns itself with the more fundamental problem of Today many internet mapping services offer a richer notion of
how to model the dynamic interactions within indoor spaces, and ‘Here’ and ‘There’ (e.g. Google Maps, Bing Maps, MapQuest,
specifically defining the elements that are required to model Open Street Maps, etc.). They achieve this by disambiguating
interactions within indoor spaces. Multi-Agent Systems (Van der between the geographical notions and moving from position to
Hoek and Wooldridge, 2008) have been used to model dynamic place (Hightower, 2003). In everyday conversation these words
interactions in spaces and the work here will draw from work are used interchangeably, but as will be shown subtle differences
done in this area. exist between the words. The solution the authors propose is to
build these notions of ‘Position’, ‘Location’, ‘Place’ and ‘Area’
The authors previously proposed a framework (Zlatanova et. al. into their indoor navigation framework.
2013) for modelling dynamics and navigation within indoor
spaces. Others such as Goetz and Zipf, 2011, Khan and Kolbe,
* Corresponding author
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 89ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
The paper is divided into three parts. Part one reviews the notions most spatial expressions within indoor space. Coventry et al 2005
of ‘Position’, ‘Location’, ‘Place’ and ‘Area’. Part two explores, proved that the prepositions depend on the object used for the
with the use of examples, how these notions translate in indoor reference.
environments. Finally, part three proposes the inclusion of these We use the prepositions to investigate the notion of placement.
notions into an indoor modelling framework previously Table 1 lists prepositions most commonly used in expressing
developed by the authors. placement or routes in/through space.
PART I Above Beneath In Out Underneath
Across Beside Inside Outside Until
2. OVERVIEW: POSITION, LOCATION, PLACE, AND Against Between Into Over Up
Ahead Beyond Left past Upon
AREA
Along By Near Right Up to
Around Close by Next Through Within
In linguistics, referential expressions are those expressions that
At Down Off Towards
describe the placement of persons, objects and things. These
Among From On (On top To
aspects have been partially addressed by a large number of Behind From...to of) Under
scientists dealing with defining relationships between objects. Below Front Opposite
Most of the investigated expressions are between two objects, i.e. Table 1. List of common prepositions used in referential
binary (I am at from of the coffee machine) and very few can be expressions
ternary (I am between the restaurant and the office of Tom).
Therefore, most of the research has been focussed on identifying The rule for forming a prepositional phrase is thus:
binary relationships. Three major approaches have been
identified for representing spatial relationships namely metric, Preposition – Optional Modifier – Noun, Pronoun
topology and direction (Kainz, 2010). The first sound models for
representing spatial relationships have been based on point-set Table 2 provides examples of prepositional phrases. Because the
theory and the notion of boundary, interior and closure of point rule contains nouns, pronouns, etc., an implication of the rule for
sets (Pullar and Egenhofer 1998, Herring 1991). This framework forming prepositional phrases is that placement is with reference
has been extended to cover 3D space and objects of different to space or other objects or things in space. In other words
dimensions (Egenhofer and Herring, 1991, Zlatanova 2000). expressions of placement are relative.
Topology represents neighbourhood relationships between two
objects, which allows the definition of inclusion (‘in’) and Preposition Modifier Noun, Example
closeness (meet, or next to). It’s a powerful method to control Pronoun, etc.,
impossible cases such as trees penetrating a house (Xu and Above The First floor Above the first floor
Zlatanova 2013, Louwsma et al 2006) or mother holding the hand Along The Passageway Walk along the
of a girl being located by a localisation system in one room and passageway
the girl in another. Many linguistic expressions such as ‘at back’, Table 2. Examples of prepositional phrases
‘at front’, or ‘between’ have been formally defined under the
category of directional relationships. Directional relationships But there are seeming exceptions like the expression ‘The toy
are more complex and require a specific frame of reference store is at 33o S, 28o E’ doesn’t refer to a noun or pronoun.
and/or context. Retz-Schmidt, 1988 discusses three frames of Although the above expression doesn’t reference a noun,
reference namely intrinsic, deictic and extrinsic. Intrinsic frame pronoun, etc., the coordinates define a latitude and longitude
relies on providing relations with respect to the reference objects. within a geographical reference frame. In this expression the
An example of an intrinsic frame is ‘right’, ‘left’, ‘at front of’ the relative reference is implicit. Relative references that are fixed
desk (the reference object). Frank 1998 introduces Euclidian and agreed to by general consensus are called absolute
frame of reference to make the directional relationships references. This is to distinguish them from arbitrary relative
unambiguous. Another approach is to use the context of the references.
situation. For example, if a person is at front of a desk, it is trivial
to indicate what is left or right. Clementini, 2013 provides a 2.2 Addressing
formalisation of number of directional relationships by mapping
Relative and absolute references can also be thought of addresses
them to projective relationships.
to placement in space. For indoor environments the addressing of
sub-spaces is complex because (a) addresses will be building
Referential expressions are used here to nuance the notion of
specific (no two buildings are guaranteed to use the same form of
placement in space. Because users of navigational aids will
addressing), (b) the person navigating the building has to either
conceive and express their placement in space using natural
have a cognitive map of the building (e.g., Moeser 1988) or be
language, it is reasonable to begin a study of placement by
familiar with different spatial schemas of building floor plans.
studying commonly used referential expressions.
For example, the answer to the question ‘Where are you in the
building?’ will depend on (a) the layout of the building, i.e.,
2.1 Prepositions
contextual knowledge, (b) how a person visualises themselves in
Prepositions are words commonly used to indicate placement. the building. One person might say, ‘At the photocopier’ and
Retz-Smith, 1988 provides an extensive review on the spatial another might say ‘In room 2.13’. Although the answers may be
prepositions used for location outdoors. Kray at al 2013 different, if they refer to the same placement they are both
investigate the prepositions used in outdoor, indoor and legitimate. An indoor model has to be able to accommodate this
transitional spaces. They conclude that some prepositions are ambiguity.
used only for indoor or outdoor spaces. For example, the
preposition ‘through’ was found to be the most used for all three 2.3 Elements of referencing
types of spaces, while ‘beneath’ and ‘behind’ has been
In classical geography the expression of the placement of objects,
predominantly used indoors. Their study shows that humans use
in relation to the outdoors, was given in terms of the concepts of
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 90ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
Topos, Choros, and Geos (Mayhew, 2011). These concepts were understand this, consider that if context were irrelevant all would
typically distinguished by scale or specificity. Topos referring to provide the same answer to a referential question (e.g., where are
the place, Choros refers to the region and Geos to the face of the you?). Statement 1 is clearly without context.
earth. These concepts are mentioned here because not only can
they be distinguished by scale, but also by the context of the From these aspects four conceptions of placement can be
environment, notions of ‘belonging in space’, and a person’s isolated: Position, Location, Place and Area (established
conception of placement in space. This provides an avenue to concepts in Geography). The notions of Position, Location,
understand and accommodate the ambiguity in addressing that is Place, and Area in relation to the above four elements is
necessary for indoor models. Below are seven typical expressions summarised in Table 3. The next part looks at how the concept
of the same placement: of Position, Location, Place and Area can be applied to indoor
environments.
Statement 1: ‘I am at 28.2314o, -33.4577o’
Statement 2: ‘I am on the chair’ PART II
Statement 3: ‘I am next to the table’
Statement 5: ‘I am in the living room’ 3. AN INDOOR PERSPECTIVE OF POSITION,
Statement 6: ‘I am at home’ LOCATION, PLACE, AND AREA
Statement 7: ‘I am in the neighbourhood’
Figure 1 represents a simplified indoor scene within a building.
From these statements certain aspects of addressing can be The scene is intended to capture the most basic spatial navigation
identified, referred to here as Reference, Specificity and within an indoor environment, namely, movement between sub-
Uncertainty, Scope and Context (see Table 3). spaces (rooms) and movement between floors. The scene also
imagines that a building is divided into blocks and that each block
Position Location Place Area contains one or more rooms. In the next sections the concepts of
Reference Absolute Absolute, Relative, Relative, Position, Location, Place and Area will be explained in relation
, e.g., a e.g. room Placement Placemen to this indoor scene.
coordina number in a room in an
te (Inside) aggregatio
system n of rooms
Specificity/ Depends Certain, Uncertain, Uncertain
Uncertainty on the defined by defined by Defined by
device the the a more
providin physical functional general
g the borders space of an notations
position (walls) object, (floors,
e.g., Desk parts of
buildings)
Scope Defined Contains Contained Contains
by a Places in locations
referenc Locations
e frame
Figure 1. Indoor scene composed of 2 floors, 6 blocks (4 blocks
Context There is Context Context Context
no on the ground floor), with each block containing 3 rooms. Two
context block on the ground floor and two blocks on the first floor are
Example I am at I am in the I am at the I am on the visible.
28.2314o living photocopi second
, - room er floor
33.4577o
Table 3. Position, Location, Place and Area
Reference: Statements 2 and 3 refer to placement relative to two
different objects, i.e., a chair and a table. Here the spatial
relationship is only defined by topology.
Specificity/Uncertainty: Statement 1 refers to a pin point
placement in space. There is no uncertainty in the placement of
(a) Absolute position (b) Relative position
the object in statement 1. Here the spatial relationship is clearly
metric. In contrast in statement 2 the definition of the extent has
Figure 2. Position defines a pin point in space and it can be with
been expanded to an area about the chair. This introduces the
reference to the origin of a global reference frame (left) or with
notion of uncertainty which relates to the extent of the
reference to the origin of a local reference frame. The former and
addressable space.
latter are referred to as absolute and relative positions
respectively.
Scope: Statements 5, 6, and 7 provide the placement at the scale
of a room, home and neighbourhood. Scope introduces the
3.1 Position
concept of the topological nesting of spaces, e.g. a room is inside
a house and a house is inside neighbourhood.
A Cartesian reference system is defined for the building. This is
shown by the grey lines in figure 2. The absolute position of
Context: Statements 2, and 3 refer to the same placement but
objects in the building are defined relative to this reference
relative to a chair and a table. The choice of the reference here
system. Note as discussed earlier, positions provide pin-point
depends on the context in which the statement is being made. To
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 91ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
placements. Further reference systems can be defined for the 3.4 Area
blocks.
Area can be thought as of being a more generalised conception
3.2 Location of Location. A helpful distinction between the two concepts is to
think of an Area as containing multiple addressable locations. For
Figure 3 shows the notion of location indoors. We specify a example in figure 5 the Area is represented by the second floor,
location referring to the smallest physically defined space in a and the rooms on the second floor can be thought of as Locations.
building. These can be rooms, corridors, stairs, hall etc. Shown Though many aggregations, such a floors can be clearly
are people standing in room 2.2.A. The address of the room identified, areas are most dependent on the cognitive map of a
indicates the precise location of the room in the building. The user and are source of misleading and confusion. Area
address reads as ‘second floor, second block, partition A’. It can placements are often used when the user is lost and seeks for
be seen that room 2.2.A refers to a placement having some extent. more specific placement.
Therefore, the exact Position of people in this room can’t be
inferred from the Location.
Figure 5. Area defines a generalised space or sub-space. In the
figure the second floor represents an area. An Area is
distinguishable from a Location in that and Area can be
Figure 3. Location defines a general placement relative to well-
decomposed into Locations.
defined physical space. For example in the figure the person can
be said to be located in the room. The uncertainty in the position
4. NAVIGATION PERSPECTIVE
of the person is defined by the extent of the room. It should be
noted that the speaker provides the context of the space.
In a multi-agent system the existence of agents and resources
with different definitions of placement may be seen as an
unnecessary complication of the navigation model. This would
be the case if each agent or resource possessed a different form
of placement, e.g., an agent whose placement is defined position
and a resource whose placement is defined by Place. But this is
not the intention here.
In the framework that will be explained in the next part, every
entity (resource or agent) is simultaneously represented as a
position, location, place and area.
PART III
Figure 4. Place defines a placement in space that relies on a user’s 5. INDOOR NAVIGATION FRAMEWORK
memory of space, i.e., the understanding of the layout of space is
In 2013 the authors developed a framework to support indoor
provided by the listener rather than the speaker.
localization and navigation. The framework was developed
around the subdivision of indoor spaces. This framework (shown
3.3 Place
in figure 7) is composed of Agents, Resources, sub-spaces,
As shown in Table 3 Place refer to a particular object and the Modifiers and Activities.
uncertain (functional) space around it. Place we use to indicate
placements, which are within Locations and have uncertain or 5.1 Conceptual framework
dynamic limits (Kruminaite and Zlatanova, 2014). Figure 4
Agents are those entities that navigate space. Space represents the
shows an example of this. In this case Place is addressed as ‘At
entirety of the enclosed environment to be navigated. To facilitate
the photocopier’. Because there are multiple photocopiers in the
navigation space is divided into sub-spaces. These sub-spaces
building the ‘At the photocopier’ expression references multiple
can either be Free or Inert. Inert spaces are inaccessible by
placements. Which instance of ‘photocopier’ a user chooses to
Agents. Examples of inert spaces are walls, indoor fountains and
visit depends on either their cognitive map of the space or
so forth. Free spaces (a) allow agents to move through them, (b)
landmarks (Raubal and Winter, 2002, Richter, 2013) within the
they contain resources, and (c) they host activities.
space. In any case if the specific placement has to be made
explicit, a Location is needed.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 92In a navigation event an agent moves between free sub-spaces enter spaces searching for resources at specific positions
and either accesses resources or engages in activities. In figure 6 locations, or places, but we leave areas.
the agent moves between three sub-spaces and accesses the
resource, Resource 3, residing in the last free space. An agent’s FREE INERT FREE FREE
use or access of a sub-space can be encumbered. For example a Resource 1 Resource 2 Resource 3
fire in a room (the sub-space) can render the room temporarily
Sub Modifier 1 Modifier 3
unusable. Modifiers are used to define the environment of a sub- Spaces Modifier 2 Modifier 4
space. Sub-spaces can be encumbered by multiple modifiers. For
example modifiers can be defined for lighting, temperature, Activity Activity Activity
sound and so forth. Together with the character of the agent
Position Position Position
(including the tasks that need to be performed), modifiers will Location Location Location
Agent
Place Place Place
determine the activities that are possible in the sub-space. For Area Area Area
example if the elevator is broken (i.e. the status of resource is START END
modified) a person carrying cleaning equipment that performs Figure 7. Position, Location, Place and Area built into the
activity ‘Cleaning’ is not possible to go to the second floor to framework.
complete the activity. In this way the framework is able to
simultaneously accommodate multiple agents with variable An example of this expansion/contraction of an address is show
needs. in figure 8. The agent has to travel from Room 2.A.3 to Room
1.B.2. The route can be addressed as Room2.A.3, Block A, Floor
2, Floor 1, Block B, Room 1.B.2.
Free and inert Spaces The dual of free and inert
spaces
Figure 8. Expansion vs Contraction of an address. As the agent
moves between the sub-spaces to reach Room 1.B.2 his/her
address inflates and then deflates.
Agents and Resources Modifiers applied to sub-
spaces, agents and resources 5.3 Logical framework
Figure 6. The proposed framework. Sub-spaces are divided into Indoor navigation systems are built on top of partition-maps (or
free and inert spaces. Sub-spaces are occupied by resources. Sub- subdivision maps) of indoor spaces. These partition-maps are
spaces are also occupied by agents who perform activities in the obtained by subdividing indoor spaces such that they reflect
sub-space or access resources. All sub-spaces, resources and cognitive spatial schemas (e.g. Khan and Kolbe 2013) of most
agents possess the property ‘Placement’ that defines where the users (agents), e.g., rooms, corridors, stairways and so forth.
entity is in space. Various subdivision models have been proposed (Afyouni et al,
2012, Zlatanova et al 2014). The two most popular variants are
5.2 Updated conceptual framework tessellations and networks. This proposed framework is indented
to be universal and does not depend on the type of subdivision.
The 2013 framework sought to accommodate customisable The remainder of this section will demonstrate the utility of the
navigation by multiple agents, i.e., the navigation route for any proposed navigation framework for a network model.
two agents with different intentions is not guaranteed to be the Applications to tessellation models will be discussed in future
same. While the framework was designed to be as flexible as papers.
possible the way in which agents, resources and activities were
referenced remained the same for all, and it was typically given Network models: Figure 9 shows the test indoor space
as a position. As already mentioned this reduces the richness of represented as a network. The subdivisions (e.g., rooms, stairs,
navigational instructions. etc.,) are represented by nodes, V, and the topological
relationship between the nodes is captured by the edges, E. The
In figure 7 placement is augmented by the concepts of position, nodes and edges are commonly stored in a graph structure, G(V,
location, place and area. In this conception every sub-space E).
simultaneously possesses a position, location, place and area
quartet. This change allows routes through space to be defined as Dominant and auxiliary traits: Each node in the graph has a
in section 4.1. Notably in this conception an agent is allowed to placement P. While every node simultaneously possesses all four
enter a sub-space with one address and leave it with an alternate types of placements (position, location, place and area), some
address. This refinement is necessary because (a) our activities in nodes have a greater affinity for specialisation than generalisation
a sub-space can alter our perception of that sub-space, and (b) we and vice versa. This affinity is here called the Dominant Trait.
ecapS
noitagivaN
ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 93ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
The alternative is called the Auxiliary Trait. For example in concepts of modifiers and placement. The choice of route is
figure 9 it can be seen that the placement of Agents (e.g. people) shown in figure 10. The navigation model is divided into three
and Resources (e.g., photocopier) are specific and will most segments, the Environment segment, the Multi-Agent System
likely be referred by positions or places. Position and Place are segment and the Route segment. The Environment segment
the dominant traits of the placement. Entrances and exits also describes the subdivision of space and the placement of resources
exhibit this trait. On the other hand the placement of rooms is within the space. A union of the subdivision of space and the
general in character and the dominant traits of placement are placement of resources yields the environment graph/network.
Location and Area.
GEnv = GSpace  GRes 1  GRes 2  …  GRes N (2)
Modifier influence inherited from the dominant trait: Each
node in the graph also has the attribute M, representing the set of The benefit of this approach is that resources can be easily
modifiers that apply to a placement. Here again the spatial added/removed from the environment in real-time. An added
specificity of the modifier inherits from the dominant trait of the benefit is that only those resources that are desired by an agent
placement. For example a fire (the modifier) in room 2.A.3 is need be included in the environment model. The Multi-Agent
conceptualised to encompass the whole of the room. However, a System segment models the interaction of multiple agents within
more specific placement can be inferred from a fire at a the environment. The proposed framework imagines that during
photocopier. This inheritance mechanism provides a more a navigation an agent will access multiple resources and/or
natural expansion and contraction of the influence of modifiers. agents. Here the optimum route is determined by a function 
over the environment graph and the graph of each agent in the
The navigation process: A guided navigation consists of three space.
main activities, planning (path computation), giving instructions,
receiving feedback (either by the user or by a localisation system) (GEnv, GAgent 1, GAgent 2, … , GAgent M) = min (3)
and correcting the path if needed (Goetz and Zipf 2011,
Zlatanova et al 2014). The planning phase aims to determine the Unlike equation (1) the function  is non-trivial and dependent
least cost route between two or more points contained in the on the character of the agents at a particular moment in time. The
space. This cost is typically measured in terms of distance, time
content of the function  will be discussed in a future paper.
and risk. The giving and receiving instructions phase determines
how best to verbally ask for a route and how best to verbally
The function of Modifiers in : In figure 10 it will be seen that
convey the route to the asker. The travelling phase considers the
all vertices, V, and edges, E possess a modifier as an attribute.
movement between the source and destination and how the agent
Furthermore the sub-spaces, resources and agents also possess
is assisted during the movement.
modifiers. Attributing all elements of the framework with
modifiers may seem overwrought but as will be show with
examples it provides a powerful mechanism for both designing
the multi-agent system and forming route instructions. The reader
may have noticed that obstacle are missing in the framework as
shown in figure 10. The reason for this is that depending on user
perspective a resource can also be treated as an obstacle. For
example for those who want to sit in a chair within a room a chair
is a resource, but for those passing through a room it’s an obstacle
to be navigated. How a resource morphs into an obstacle is
determined by the modifier associated with the resource.
Therefore, an obstacle is a resource encumbered by a modifier
that repels those who do not desire the resource. This provides a
more faithful modelling of how agents perceive the world and
interact with resources and obstacles. As can be seen modifiers
are a powerful way of building dynamism into navigation
Figure 9 Representation of indoor space as a network. The large
models. In the next example the function of modifiers is taken
blue circles represent locations indoors, they reference general
even further.
placement. The smaller red circles represent positions or places,
and reference specific placement. All placements are assigned
Attributing agents with modifiers allows agents to influence the
positions.
space they move in. For example when a security official enters
a room he/she can impose restrictions on activities that may take
The selected route determined from the navigation process can
place in that room. As indicated earlier modifiers inherit from the
be described as GRoute(Vposition/cost, Ecost) where GRoute is a
dominant trait of placement. This allows spaces, resources and
subgraph of G. Note that in conventional solutions vertices are
agents to possess modifiers that are adapted to their various forms
only attributed by a position and the cost of passing through a
of placement, which permits rich interpretations. For example a
vertex. The best route is then identified as that route for which
resource, Res1, has the following placements, Position = (23.12,
optimising function  is given by: 50.2, 45.1), Location = ‘Room 1.A.2’, Place = ‘Photocopier’,
Area = ‘1st Floor’. If Res1 is on fire, a modifier called ‘Fire’ can
 =  Ecost = min (1) be associated with Res1. Naturally, the region of influence of the
modifier depends on the form of placement and different
Conventional indoor navigation models have various limitations. definition of the ‘Fire’ modifier will have to be defined for each
For example conventional indoor models do not account for form of placement. The forms and interaction of placements and
dynamic environments (e.g., moveable resources), variable modifiers are complex. Theses interaction are modelled in the
notions of placement (during travel) and that agents will navigate function . The form of modifiers cannot be elaborated in the
space differently. For this reason the proposed framework
includes the concepts of agents and resources, and introduces the
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 94space available here and will therefore be left for discussion in a
future paper.
Figure 10. Representation of indoor space as a network. The large
blue circles represent locations indoors, they reference general Figure 11 Application of the navigation framework. Blue circle
placement. The smaller red circles represent positions or places, represent entities (in this case sub-spaces) whose dominant trait
and reference specific placement. is Location. Red circles represent entities (in this case agents)
whose dominant trait is Position. Green circles represent entities
5.4 Application of the Framework whose dominant trait is Place.
In this section an application of the framework is demonstrated
Figure 11 shows the problem implemented according to the
using a simple example. The problem is composed of the
representation in figure 10. Note that the network in figure 11 is
following element shown in table 4.
sub-network of the network shown in figure 9. The sub-spaces
(shown in blue) are to be traversed by the Secretary who is in
Item Type Dominant Modifier Corridor 2.1. Each sub-space inherits the modifiers of its
Trait attendant agent or resource/obstacle, e.g., Room 1.A.1 is
Secretary Agent Position Space Lock inaccessible because this sub-space inherits the global Space
Cleaner Agent Position Space Lock Lock modifier of the Cleaner. To reach the photocopier the
Photocopier Resource Place Access 0 Secretary will have to travel through Room 1.A. Room 1.A has
Floor 2 Sub-Space Area the global modifier Slippery Floor. Therefore, the Secretary will
Stairs Sub-Space Location be cautioned when entering this room. Room 1.A. Room 1.A also
Floor 1 Sub-Space Area inherits the local Access 1 modifier from the Plant and the Table.
Corridor Sub-Space Location The Secretary doesn’t have Access 1 permissions which causes
Room 1.A Sub-Space Location Slippery Floor the Plant and Table to become obstacles. Room 1.A.2 inherits the
Room 1.A.1 Sub-Space Location local Access 0 modifier from the photocopier. The Secretary has
Room 1.A.2 Sub-Space Location Access 0 permissions and because of this the photocopier
Table Resource Place Access 1 becomes a resource.
Plant Resource Place Access 1
6. CONCLUSION
Table 4. A navigation problem demonstrating the application of
the framework
This paper presents an extension of previously proposed
framework on space subdivision, in which the notions of
Parameters of the problem: (1) The Secretary needs to use a
placement are accounted for. Placement is expressed in terms of
photocopier in room 1.A.2. To use the copier the Secretary has to
the concepts of Position, Location, Place and Area. The power of
travel from Floor 2 (upper floor) to Floor 1 (lower floor) and
the framework is that it blends the geometry and topology of
reach Room 1.A.2 (Photocopier room). (2) The Cleaner is
space, the influence of human activity within sub-spaces together
working on the ground floor. (3) The Secretary and Cleaner may
with the different conceptions of placement in a way that is
not be in the same room at the same time. (4) When travelling
simple and yet very flexible and intuitive. The proposed
through Room 1.A the Secretary has to navigate past a Table and
framework operates only with resources. Whether a resource is
Plant (obstacles). The Cleaner has to tend to the Table and Plant
an obstacle is determined by a modifier that determines whether
(resources). Here the Table and Plant possess dual roles. (5)
a user can access the resource. Furthermore, the expression for
Room 1.A has just been cleaned and the floors are slippery.
ecapSG
1 seRG
2 seRG
vnEG
1 tnegAG
2
tnegAG
etuoRG
Graph Example
VS
PM
ES
M
R1
VR1
PM
ER1
M
Union
VR2
PM
ER2
M
R2
R1
VPM EM R2
A1 VA1
pM
EA1
M
Φ
A2
VA2
pM
EA2
M
A1 A2 R1
V’ PM E’ M R2
tnemnorivnE
metsyS
tnegA-itluM
etuoR
ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 95ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume III-4, 2016
XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July 2016, Prague, Czech Republic
navigating around a resource (obstacle) is determined by the Spaces, Spatial Information Theory. 11th International
dominant placement of the resource. Conference, COSIT 2013, Scarborough, UK, September 2-6,
2013. Proceedings, Vol. 8116, LNCS. pp. 14-32
The great benefit of the model is that it’s scalable and permits the
real time addition and removal of entities. Future work will Kruminaite, M. and S. Zlatanova, 2014. Indoor Space
identify the various forms of agents, resources, and modifiers. Subdivision for Indoor Navigation. ISA'14, Proceedings of the
Importantly work will be done in determining rules for designing Six ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Indoor
the optimising function  when searching for optimal routes Spatial Awareness, pp. 25–31.
within indoor environments.
Louwsma, J., S. Zlatanova, R van Lammeren, and P. van
Oosterom, 2006. Specifications and implementations of
6.1 References
constraints in GIS, In: GeoInformatica, Vol. 10(4). pp. 531-550
Afyouni, I., Ray, C., and Claramunt, C. 2012. Spatial models for
Mayhew, R., 2011, Geography’s Genealogies, in Agnew and
context-aware indoor navigation systems: A survey, Journal of
Livingstone (Eds.) The SAGA handbook of Geographical
Spatial Information Science, Number 4 (2012), 85–123.
knowledge, SAGE, Los Angeles, pp. 21-38
Chen, D. L., and Mooney R. J., 2011. Learning to interpret
Moeser, S. D., 1988. Cognitive mapping in a complex building.
natural language navigation instructions from observations.
Environment and Behavior 20(1). pp 21-49.
Learning to interpret natural language navigation instructions
from observations. In Association for the Advancement of
Pullar D.V., Egenhofer, M.J., 1988. Toward the definition and
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp 128–135, Cambridge, MA.
use of topological relations among spatial objects. In Proc. Third
Int. Symp. on Spatial Data Handling, pp. 225–242.
Clementini, E, 2013. Directional relations and frames of
reference. GeoInformatica, 17(2). pp 235-255
Raubal, M. and S. Winter, 2002, Enriching wayfinding
instructions with local landmarks. Geographic information
Coventry, K. R., A. Cangelosi, R. Rajapakse, A. Bacon, S.
science, LNCS, Springer, pp. 243-259
Newstead, D. Joyce, L. V. Richards, 2005. Spatial Prepositions
and Vague Quantifiers: Implementing the Functional Geometric
Retz-Schmidt, G., 1988. Various views on spatial prepositions,
Framework, Spatial Cognition IV. Reasoning, Action,
AI magazine, 9(2), pp. 95-105
Interaction, Vol. 3343, Lecture Notes in Computer Science pp.
98-110 Richter, K-F., 2013, Prospects and challenges of landmarks in
navigation services. In Cognitive and Linguistic Aspects of
Egenhofer MJ, Herring JR, 1991. Categorising topological
Geographic Space, pages 83–97. Springer, 2013.
relations between regions, lines and points in geographic
databases, in: Egenhofer MJ and Herring IR (Eds.), A Framework Van der Hoek, W., and Wooldridge, M, 2008. Multi-agent
for the Definition of Topological Relationships and an Approach systems. Foundations of Artificial Intelligence 3, pp 887-928.
to Spatial Reasoning within this Framework, Santa Barbara, CA.
pp 1–28 Yang, Y., and M. Worboys, 2005, Generation of navigation
graphs for indoor space, International Journal of Geographical
Frank, A.U., 1998. Formal models for cognition—taxonomy of Information Science, 29 (10) pp. 1737-1756
spatial location description and frames of reference, Spatial
Cognition, LNCS, Springer, pp. 293-312 Xu, D. and S. Zlatanova, 2013. An approach to develop 3D
GeoDBMS topological operators by reducing existing 2D
Goetz, M., and Zipf, A. 2011. Formal definition of a useradaptive operators, ISPRS Annals – Volume II-2/W1, 2013, WG II/2, 8th
and length-optimal routing graph for complex indoor 3D GeoInfo Conference & ISPRS WG II/2 Workshop,
environments. Geo-Spatial Information Science, 14(2), 119-128 November 2013, Istanbul, Turkey. pp. 291–298
Hightower, J., 2003. From Position to Place. Proceedings of the Zlatanova, S., 2000. On 3D topological relationships, In:
2003 Workshop on Location-Aware Computing. Fifth Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Database
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, October 12- and Expert System Applications (DEXA 2000), 6-8 September,
15, 2003, Greenwich, London, UK. pp. 913-919
Jung, H. and Lee, J.: Indoor subspacing to implement Zlatanova, S., Liu, L., and Sithole, G., 2013. A conceptual
IndoorGML for indoor navigation, Int. Arch. Photogramm. framework of space subdivision for indoor navigation. In The ISA
Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., XL-2/W4, 25-27. '13 Proceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Workshop on Indoor Spatial Awareness, ACM, NY, USA, pp.
Kanz, W, 2010, The mathematics of GIS, Department of
37-41.
Geography and Regional Research, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. Zlatanova, S., L. Liu, G. Sithole, J. Zhao and F. Mortari, 2014,
Space subdivision for indoor applications, GISt Report, nr. 66,
Khan, A. A. and Kolbe, T. H., 2013, Subspacing, based on
Delft, 2014 50 p.
connected opening spaces and for different ocomotion types
using geometric and graph-based representation in multi-layered
space-event model (MLSEM), ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote
Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., II-2/W1, 173-185.
Kray, C., H. Fritze, T. Fechner, A. Schwering, R. Li, V. Joy
Anact, 2013. Transitional Spaces: Between Indoor and Outdoor
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-III-4-89-2016 96