See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221608249
Indoor positioning: Challenges and solutions for indoor cultural heritage site
Conference Paper · February 2011
DOI: 10.1145/1943403.1943469 · Source: DBLP
CITATIONS READS
28 5,210
7 authors, including:
Tsvi Kuflik Joel Lanir
University of Haifa University of Haifa
296 PUBLICATIONS 4,812 CITATIONS 94 PUBLICATIONS 1,766 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Eyal Dim Alan J. Wecker
University of Haifa University of Haifa
17 PUBLICATIONS 233 CITATIONS 60 PUBLICATIONS 525 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Joel Lanir on 14 February 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.Indoor Positioning: Challenges and Solutions
for Indoor Cultural Heritage Site
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir, Michele Corra’ Massimo Zancanaro,
Eyal Dim, Alan Wecker Tretec S.r.l. Oliviero Stock
University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Via Solteri 38, FBK-irst
Haifa 31905, Israel Trento 38121, Italy Via Sommarive 18,
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il, ylanir@ is.haifa.ac.il, michele.corra@3tec.it Povo 38050 Italy
dimeyal@ bezeqint.net, ajwecker@ gmail.com zancana@fbk.eu, stock@fbk.eu
just a bit more is provided by museum visitors guides, mainly
ABSTRACT because of the limits of time and patience of the visitors. The
Museums are both appealing and challenging as an advent of mobile technology brought with it the notion of
environment for indoor positioning research. By nature, they context awareness, hence recent research prototypes of
are dense and rich in objects and information, and as a result museum visitors guides [Stock et al. 2007; Wakary and
they contain more information than a visitor can absorb in a Hatala, 2007; Kuflik et al., to appear] attempt to provide
time-limited visit. Many research projects have explored the personalized context aware information to their users.
potential of novel technologies to support information Location awareness is a key component in such systems and
delivery to museum visitors. Having an accurate visitor one of the major challenges systems face, since, in spite of
position is a key factor in the success of such projects. In numerous attempts and a variety of technologies
spite of numerous technologies experimented with, there is experimented with, there is still no good solution for the
no prevailing indoor positioning technology. Each requirements of determining museum visitor’s location. The
technology has its benefits as well as its limitations. In system is required to be accurate (about +/- 25 cm or so) in
addition, museums have their own constrains when it comes order to be able to pin-point visitors position, given the sizes
to installation of sensors in their space. In the framework of of museum displays. Moreover, location itself is not enough
the PIL project, a flexible “light weight” proximity based and orientation and line of sight are needed for understanding
positioning system was developed and deployed at the Hecht the visitors point of interest. However, museums have their
museum and a general framework for indoor positioning is own constrains when it comes to installation of sensors in
proposed. The inherent limitations of the basic technology their space. As a result, presently, there are no integrated
are addressed by an abstract reasoning layer and by a dialog solutions (even though bits and pieces exist) that address all
with the user. these requirements. The paper addresses the gap between
crude positioning and specific visitors’ interests; bridging
Author Keywords
them by a framework that uses different techniques that are
Visitor Guides, Indoor positioning.
used at different levels of the system, including a short dialog
ACM Classification Keywords with the user for determining the exact object of interest, as
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
necessary.
Miscellaneous.
INDOOR POSITIONING IN MUSEUMS
General Terms Over the years, a variety of technologies have been
Design. experimented for indoor positioning in museums. Besides
INTRODUCTION the need for high accuracy due to the density of objects,
Museums are both a challenging and appealing arena for museums in general have additional challenging constraints
experimentation with novel technologies for information regarding the installation of equipment (e.g. it should be
delivery. They are quite dense, full of interesting objects, and invisible, require zero infrastructure and maintenance…).
rich in information about them. However, only small part of So far, no technology exists that answers all these
the information about the objects is presented in labels while requirements. Either the system is not invisible, or it needs
some infrastructure, or it is not accurate enough or it requires
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for some user-actions (which may harm the cultural experience
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are by requiring the visitor to focus on the technology rather than
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
on the museum content). Two types of technology were
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
widely experimented with – Infra Red (IR) based positioning
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. and Radio Frequency (RF) based positioning. In addition to
IUI’11, February 13–16, 2011, Palo Alto, California, USA. these two that were widely used, visual based positioning
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0419-1/11/02...$10.00.
375was experimented as well. Infra Red technology was among (illustrated by Fig. 1, bottom, left), The Hecht1 museum is
the first to be exploited in many projects [Oppermann and equipped with a Radio Frequency (RF) based positioning
Specht, 1999; Stock et al., 2007; Kuflik et al., to appear]. system relying on a wireless sensor network (WSN)
However, it requires visible IR emitters, and a line of sight composed of RF devices designed and produced by Tretec,
between the emitter and the receiver. Moreover, IR signals an Italian SME. The WSN operates on the 2.4GHz ISM band
are detected in a conical sphere in from of the emitter, with and is based on 802.15.4 protocol, the underlying layer of the
limited control over the distance, hence emitters need to be well known ZigBee protocol. The WSN is formed by three
well spaced (to avoid overlapping). These constraints different kinds of objects: fixed RF tags called Beacons (Fig.
required fine tuning IR emitters’ parameters as well as users 1, top, right), small (matchbox size) mobile wearable RF tags
awareness of their existence. RF technology had many called Blinds (Fig. 1, top, left) and RF to TCP Gateways (Fig.
variants, some trying to use whatever may be available like 1 bottom, right). Beacons and Gateways have the same size
WiFi based positioning, relying on a sort of triangulation, and are roughly twice the size of a Blind (about a cigarettes’
while others, based on Ultra Wide Band (UWB), RFID, box size).
Bluetooth, ZigBee and more applied specific technologies for
that purpose. Khoury and Kamat [2009] reviewed and
analyzed RF based indoor positioning technologies. They
also studied and compared three different wireless
technologies (WiFi, UWB and Indoor GPS). They found that
the Indoor GPS positioning technology is the most promising
due to the low level of uncertainty in the reported user
position (1 to 2 cm) compared to that of WLAN (1.5 to 2 m)
and UWB (10 to 50 cm). However, while WiFi equipment
may be available, its accuracy is not good enough for the
museum and it may require additional installation of access
points for improving performance. UWB provides reasonable
accuracy in the price of a challenging installation
requirements (line of sight is needed) and high cost. Indoor
GPS that performed best also requires line of sight and is
Figure 1: Positioning device and usage scenario
expensive to install. Further research is needed to evaluate
the effectiveness of other feasible technologies such as Radio The Gateways transfer the data reported by the Blinds and
Frequency Identification (RFID) for high-precision indoor Beacons’ status, over a local area network to the PIL2's
position tracking, mainly due to current technology that server. Beacons are statically located at entrances and exits,
either requires very close proximity of few centimeters for as well as near relevant locations of interest in the museum,
passive RFID or up to 50 centimeters (too constraining) for while Blinds are carried by visitors (Fig. 1, bottom, left).
active RFID or a few meters (too coarse grained). Wakkary When a Blind is in proximity of a Beacon or another Blind,
and Hatala [2007] experimented with combination of optical that Blind reports this information to the PIL sever through
tracking and active RFID. Again, optical tracking is the nearest Gateway. The PIL server parses, filters and
expensive and requires complicated installation and line of enhances the information, determining the visitor’s position.
sight to visible light sources the visitor is wearing and as Another PIL component then decides on actions, e.g.
such, is quite challenging solution. Skibniewski and Jang suggesting visitor personalized content adapted to the
[2006] explored the use of ZigBee networks for tracking and reported location. It should be noted that in general, several
monitoring objects in ubiquitous computing, avoiding some signals may be detected by a Blind, so that it can report a
of the RFID limitations by using the capabilities of the idea number of possible locations with different weights. The
of a sensors network. An approach, which was similarly, ordered set of results, above a given threshold, is sent to the
adopted by us. Kray and Kortuem [2005] suggested an positioning server. The positioning system has several other
integrated approach to positioning. At the very bottom there important features: (i) measuring proximity among Blinds,
are sensors providing positioning measurements that are used allowing to reason about the proximity among visitors; (ii)
for inferring user position that may be approved or further detecting voice level and activity, a feature that can be used
refined by interaction with the user. Our work continues that to assess the level of conversation among visitors as well as
approach. their proximity (people may have a face to face conversation
only if they are close to each other), (iii) detecting orientation
PIL POSITIONING SYSTEM
of visitors, using embedded magnetometers, enabling the
Given the fact that there is no commonly acceptable indoor
assessment whether visitors are facing each other, the
solution, we designed our own solution that minimizes the
installation complexity while providing acceptable accuracy
of being within 1.5 to 2 meters from the object of interest
1 http://mushecht.haifa.ac.il/
2 http://www.cri.haifa.ac.il/connections/pil/
376exhibits or standing back to back, and (iv) detecting motion of refining the algorithms used, to balance relevant recent
using embedded accelerometers. history with the latest signal detection data. Another element
introduced at firmware level is “parasitic detection”: Blind A
Particular attention was paid to power consumption of battery
may be in close proximity to Blind B but not detected at any
powered devices (Beacons), to their dimension (Blinds) and
specific position, while Blind B may be detected at a certain
to the best match of proximity areas. The former goal was
position; thanks to the Blind proximity feature described
reached thanks to an appropriate firmware and hardware
above, we infer that A is at the same position as B. While the
design of the Beacon devices: they last up to six months
above provided solution to “false negatives”, it didn't deal
when powered by 2 C-size batteries. High density surface
with reflections and irregularities of antenna patterns. As part
mount technology and LiIon batteries helped reduce the size
of our attempt at a solution we introduced a software filtering
of the Blinds. Finally, selecting off-the-shelf 2.4 Ghz
layer whose purpose was to consider the spatial layout. The
antennas brought the best tradeoff among the following
reasoning in this layer is based on the time it takes a user to
requirements: small dimensions of Beacons, proximity area
move from a place to another. Starting from a network of
match and low power RF communication.
elementary paths with relative distances and maximum speed
CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS conceivable in the museum, positions incompatible with
The positioning system as deployed, presented the following recent positions are filtered out and compatible ones are
categories of challenges: accuracy, availability, stability. By given different weights (Figure 2 shows an interface view of
accuracy problem we denote that the system didn't always a fragment of the Hecht museum). In particular in this
provide the correct position within the specified allowances process “illegal” proximities (e.g., radio-visible Beacons that
(~1.5m). Availability problems are defined as not providing are behind physical barriers which cannot be crossed) are
results within a constrained time limit (~3 sec). Stability ruled out.
problems refer to not providing consistent results (especially
when a user is in a borderline position). The problems in each
of these categories can be further classified as inherent,
constrained, or implementation-related.. Inherent refers to
the fact that this is a built in feature of such systems. For
example a ZigBee system can't determine the line of gaze
(i.e. which exhibit is the user is looking at). Constrained
concerns itself with the fact that the system in its present
technology has certain limits (i.e a position can be
determined only within ~1.5m). Implementation problems
are connected with the specific implementation of the system,
like bugs, ill-defined API, responsiveness, etc. There are
variety of reasons for these problems, rooted in the specific
characteristics of the technology, as well as the specific
museum environs:
 Transmission power setup, and thresholds as well as Figure 2: Configuration interface view
antenna reception patterns impacts the area a where a
There are cases though when resolution is intrinsically
Beacon is detected by Blinds and cause “false negative”
insufficient - two significant positions in the museum may be
visitors not detected at positions.
simply too close. Such cases were solved by combining
 Human body shield detection by the Beacon and may cause adjacent positions into one single complex position and using
“false negative”. a simple dialogue to disambiguate the current position (where
 Metal, glass and other reflective surfaces may cause the visitor is presented with an aerial image and selects the
erroneous ”false positive” detections in wrong places. object of interest among the available ones).
 Irregular antenna patterns may cause spikes of “false
EVALUATION OF THE POSITIONING SOLUTION
negatives” as well as “false positives”
In order to evaluate the positioning system as well as our
The proposed solution is formulated via a multi-layered approach with the PIL visitor’s guide, the guide was tested by
approach. On the hardware level (Beacons, Blinds, gateways visitors of the Hecht museum. Twenty one visitors
antennas), the solutions consisted of using different antennas, participated in the evaluation. They were offered free use of
individual configuration of Beacon transmission power, and the guide and were asked to fill in a questionnaire at the end
physical location of Beacons and gateways. Beacon of their visit. In addition, log files with detailed information
transmission power is constrained as follows: the higher the of the visits were recorded. About 20% of the museum floor
power the better the detection, the drawback interference and area was covered by 26 Beacons, marking 26 locations of
detection of Blinds while they are in nearby positions. So the interest in four exhibition rooms, providing visitors with
power levels are tweaked in order to provide an optimal contextual information seen on their museum guide as soon
solution as possible. Solutions at the firmware level consisted as they approached a location (over 300 multimedia
377presentations in total). Out of the 26 positions, 10 had more finally, the user that can be involved in selecting a specific
than one sub-location allowing visitors to choose, using the exhibit of interest within a larger area pointed by the
interface a sub-location of interest. Analysis of recorded visit positioning system. For this latter point the importance of
logs reveals that on average, visitors visited 7.14 locations good navigational aids with fast and meaningful feedback to
each, for 131.1 seconds in a location and watching 2.31 the user must be emphasized. It should help him continuously
presentations per location (multiple multimedia presentations understand what information is available in his vicinity (and
were available for each location). Out of the locations that beyond) and at the same time provide intelligent means for
had sub-locations, we see that different visitors chose interaction with the positioning system. Currently, when
different sub-locations, apparently according to personal there is no satisfying indoor positioning solution (highly
interest. It is interesting to note that most of the visitors accurate, invisible and with little infrastructure and
(14/21), in at least one location, viewed presentations from maintenance requirements), solutions must be tailored in
two or more sub-locations, showing interest in more than one such layered approach – the technological solution selected
sub-location (exhibit). needs to be enhanced with reasoning mechanisms and finally,
get the visitor involved for resolving ambiguities. Such an
On average a visit lasted 52.3 minutes. Visitors’ location
approach may enable us to accommodate different
using the positioning system was known 29.18% of the time
requirements and characteristics of different indoors settings,
– when visitors were in the vicinity of objects of interest.
while allowing easy integration of various technological
This analysis is drawn from the number of Blind messages
solutions as they become available, until there is a generic
with position received out of the total number of Blind
acceptable solution – similar to the situation in outdoor GPS.
messages (Blinds transmit a message approximately every
second). All were correct (no false positives) as system
presentations were always coherent with positions. If we add
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
our knowledge of user interaction (we assume that when a
The work was supported by the collaboration project
user is interacting with the guide concerning an exhibit, or
between the Caesarea-Rothschild Institute at the University
viewing a presentation related to an exhibit, he is at the
of Haifa and FBK/irst and by FIRB project RBIN045PXH.
relevant location), then, the visitor, for the application
purpose was “located” 43.89% of the total time. The
difference between these two figures is because of persisting
REFERENCES
individual false negatives. These numbers make sense
1. Khoury, H. and Kamat, V. Evaluation of position tracking
because as noted above, only selected areas of interest in the
technologies for user localization in indoor construction
museum (20%) were covered (naturally, visitors spent more
environments, Automation in Construction 18, 4 (2009),
time in areas where they could get information). When
444–457.
visitors were walking between areas of interest, or when they
2. Kray, C. and Kortuem, G. Towards an integrated
stood in front of exhibits that were not covered, no precise
approach to positioning. In proceedings of Workshop on
location data were available. We should also say that we just
Spatio-Temporal Reasoning, at IJCAI'05. Edinburgh,
used individual visitors, so “parasitic detection” could not be
Scotland. (2005).
exploited.
3. Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Gorfinkel, A., Jbara,
Following the visit, visitors indicated (using a 7-point Likert S., Kats, S., Sheidin, J. and Kashtan, N. Journal of
scale) that the use of the guide was easy and intuitive (ave. Computers and Cultural Heritage. (to appear).
5.6; 17 out of 21 visitors agreed with this statement), it
4. Oppermann R. and Specht M. A Nomadic Information
helped them improve their visit experience (ave. 5.9), and
System for Adaptive Exhibition Guidance. In Bearman,
that they would like to use such a guide in future visits (ave.
D. a Trant, J. (eds.) Cultural Heritage Informatics:
6.1). While we didn't ask directly about positioning
selected papers from ICHIM 99 (1999) 103-110.
satisfaction (because users simply used the interface and
5. Skibniewski, M.J. and Jang, W.S. Ubiquitous computing:
were not aware of using a “positioning system”), we assume
object tracking and monitoring in construction processes
that satisfaction of the positioning is implicitly included in
utilizing ZigBee networks, Proceedings of the 23rd
the general satisfaction and usability of the system. Hence,
International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in
regarding accuracy, availability and stability discussed
Construction (ISARC), Tokyo, Japan, (2006) 287–292.
earlier, the suggested layered approach, seems to be an
6. Stock O., Zancanaro M., Busetta P., Callaway C., Krüger
acceptable solution.
A., Kruppa M., Kuflik T., Not E. and Rocchi C.,
DISCUSSION Adaptive, intelligent presentation of information for the
This work demonstrates how museum challenges can be
museum visitor in PEACH. User Modeling and User-
addressed by a specific technological solution and how the
Adapted Interaction. 17 3 (2007) 257-304.
limitations of indoor positioning technology can be addressed
7. Wakkary, R. and Hatala, M. 2007. Situated play in a
by a multi-layer architecture. Inherent hardware limitations
tangible interface and adaptive audio museum guide.
are addressed by higher levels of logic – embedded firmware,
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 11, 3 (2007), 171-191.
positioning reasoning software and the user interface and
378
View publication stats