Smarter PhoneS
Indoor Positioning
and navigation
with Camera Phones
This low-cost indoor navigation system uses off-the-shelf camera
phones to determine user location in real time by detecting unobtrusive
fiduciary markers.
G
PS-based navigation systems orientation guide that relies solely on camera
have become very popular, phones. Whereas previous work on barcode-
mainly because they let people based location tracking, such as QR Codes
rapidly explore unknown areas. (www.qrcode.com), relies on non-real-time
However, GPS works only out- “snapshot” processing, our approach allows
doors, because the required satellite links are for continuously scanning an environment in
blocked or unreliable inside buildings. For real time (15 Hz or more) in search of navi-
indoor location sensing, many types of sensors gation hints. Thus, navigation scales from
exist, including ultrasonic, infrared, magnetic, sparse, strategically placed fiduciary markers
and radio sensors. But they all require a perma- to continuous navigation in 3D.
nent electronic infrastructure Real-time marker-based tracking of position
Alessandro Mulloni, to facilitate measurements, is available in several desktop-based applica-
Daniel Wagner, and localizable objects rely- tions, but it has only recently become available
and Dieter Schmalstieg ing on this infrastructure need in phones. Consequently, systems for continu-
Graz University of Technology special sensors or actuators. ous navigation using marker-based tracking
Practical problems such as haven’t been studied extensively. Non-real-time
Istvan Barakonyi
power consumption, wiring, marker-based recognition in existing location-
Imagination Computer
and overall infrastructure based services usually takes several seconds, and
Services GesmbH
cost have inhibited such tech- the service providers typically place markers to
nology’s deployment in entire highlight a particular location rather than to act
buildings. as pure navigation landmarks (see the “Indoor
In previous work,1 we demonstrated how Navigation and Localization” sidebar).
to detect and decode square fiduciary mark- We’ve examined marker-based tracking’s
ers in real time using off-the-shelf camera suitability for continuous navigation in mobile
phones. Such markers contain a 2D barcode phones. We conducted a controlled user study
that provides a unique ID from the camera to compare our system with a map without lo-
image, which the camera phone can use to es- calization and with a GPS-like real-time local-
timate in real time its position and orientation ization. In this article, we provide an evaluation
relative to the marker. The indoor navigation of subjective experiences about ease of use and
system we describe in this article takes ad- location awareness. We also discuss experiences
vantage of associating locations with mark- from deploying our software at four large-scale
ers to provide an inexpensive, building-wide events, testing its usability under real-world con-
22 PERVASIVE computing Published by the IEEE CS n 1536-1268/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEEIndoor navigation and Localization
T
here is a large body of work on indoor navigation in robot- with our system, localization works on only certain hot spots. But
ics. Guilherme DeSouza and Avinash Kak provide a good the markerless tracking approach makes it difficult for visitors to
overview.1 These systems commonly harness a robot’s controlled recognize those hot spots.
position and movements and try to detect its pose using natural-
feature tracking based on cameras or range sensors. However,
such algorithms exceed what is currently possible on mobile RefeRences
phones.
1. G.n. DeSouza and A.C. Kak, “Vision for Mobile robot navigation:
Among the first dedicated wearable location systems was Ac-
A Survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Feb.
tive Badge,2 which consisted of infrared badges sending location 2002, pp. 237–267.
information signals to a server. Its successor, the Bat system,3
2. r. Want et al., “The Active Badge location System,” ACM Trans. Infor-
used ultrasonic location estimation to provide more accurate
mation Systems, jan. 1992, pp. 91–102.
position data. Another system for location tracking, placelab,4
used signal strength of various wireless connections such as GSM 3. M. Addlesee et al., “Implementing a Sentient Computing System,”
Computer, Aug. 2001, pp. 50–56.
(Global System for Mobile Communications), Bluetooth, and Wi-
Fi. Accuracy strongly depended on the number of senders in the 4. V. Otsason et al., “Accurate GSM Indoor localization,” Proc. Int’l
environment and ranged from 3 to 6 meters for indoor use. For a Symp. Ubiquitous Computing (ubicomp 05), lnCS 3660, Springer,
2005, pp. 141–158.
good overview of positioning technologies, see the survey by jef-
frey Hightower and Gaetano Borriello.5 5. j. Hightower and G. Borriello, “location Systems for ubiquitous
Cyberguide was an early project targeting human indoor Computing,” Computer, Aug. 2001, pp. 57–66.
navigation and guidance.6 It used remote controls as low-cost
6. G.D. Abowd et al., “Cyberguide: A Mobile Context-Aware Tour
infrared beacons, but the cost of the remote controls prevented Guide,” Wireless Networks, Oct. 1997, pp. 421–433.
deployment in larger areas or large numbers of users. The
7. j.l. Encarnação and T. Kirste, “Beyond the Desktop: natural Interac-
eGuide project and the resource-Adaptive Mobile navigation
tion and Intelligent Assistance for the Everyday life,” Proc. Computer
System use similar techniques.7,8 Davide Merico and roberto Bi- Graphik Topics, 2000, pp. 16–19 (in German).
siani use inertial sensors to track user movements.9 periodically,
8. j. Baus, A. Kruger, and W. Wahlster, “A resource-Adaptive Mobile
users must calibrate their position by choosing distance measure-
navigation System,” Proc. 7th Int’l Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces (IuI
ments in panoramic views of the environment on the device’s 02), ACM press, 2002, pp. 15–22.
screen. naturally, creating these views is work intensive for large
9. D. Merico and r. Bisiani, “Indoor navigation with Minimal Infra-
areas. Harlan Hile and Gaetano Borriello report an indoor naviga-
structure,” Proc. 4th Workshop Positioning, Navigation and Communi-
tion system based on the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) cation (WpnC 07), IEEE press, 2007, pp. 141–144.
method.10 This system relies on a server to outsource the actual
10. H. Hile and G. Borriello, “Information Overlay for Camera phones in
pose estimation work, providing limited scalability and long
Indoor Environments,” Proc. 3rd Int’l Symp. Location- and Context-
latency—a processing time of roughly 10 seconds per image Awareness (loCA 07), lnCS 4718, Springer, 2007, pp. 68–84.
makes this system unsuitable for large-scale deployment.
11. T. Miyashita et al., “An Augmented reality Museum Guide,” Proc. 7th
recently, Tsutomu Miyashita and his colleagues presented a
IEEE/ACM Int’l Symp. Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAr 08), IEEE
pC-based museum guide using natural-feature tracking.11 As press, 2008, pp. 103–106.
ditions. Both evaluations suggest that cial markers is highly robust and works encourages users to place highly visible
marker-based navigation with camera well under varying lighting conditions stickers with barcodes worldwide, each
phones works well and fits real-world and with minimal computational re- linking to online content.
requirements. sources. Moreover, fiduciary markers’ Our marker-tracking software li-
unusual visual appearance makes them brary can estimate, with 6 degrees of
human-Friendly more noticeable, helping users identify freedom (DOF), a camera phone’s po-
Fiduciary markers information hot spots in visually clut- sition and orientation with respect to
Localization using fiduciary markers is tered environments as well as large en- markers. Because maps are only 2D
a well-established mechanism in mobile vironments where interest points are representations of the world, we can
applications. Unlike natural-feature sparse. For example, the Yellow Ar- limit the localization to use only 3 DOF,
tracking, detecting and decoding artifi- row project (http://yellowarrow.net) sufficient to estimate the phone’s 2D
AprIl–junE 2009 PERVASIVE computing 23Smarter PhoneS
Figure 1. Development of fiduciary ters or hotels. Using our marker-tracking
markers and conference posters at technology, we created a location-based
(a) the 2007 Microsoft Mobile and conference guide called Signpost. We
Embedded Developers Conference designed this application to work with
(MEDC 2007) and (b) Microsoft’s sparse tracking, to limit the number of
TechReady7; and (c) use of our deployed markers to a manageable size.
localization system at TechReady7. For example, we installed 37 markers at
a conference site in the Venetian Hotel
Las Vegas in April 2007, in an area of
position and orientation. This makes roughly 100 m × 200 m.
our system more practical to deploy Although 6-DOF tracking can deliver
because marker positions and orienta- centimeter-level accuracy when mark-
tions need only be specified in 2D. ers are tracked, presenting only the 2D
We deployed traditional square location on a map reduces accuracy
markers at the 2007 Microsoft Mobile requirements significantly. This is im-
and Embedded Developers Conference portant because conference organizers
(MEDC 2007), as Figure 1a shows. must consider the logistics of deploy-
Over time, we introduced a new type ing and inspecting marker placement.
of less visually obtrusive markers called The most efficient way, developed after
frame markers (see Figure 1b). Frame consulting conference organizers, was
markers encode the same amount of to stick markers onto poster stands,
data (36 bits) as traditional square which could be quickly deployed on site
markers, but they arrange the data at preplanned locations (see Figure 1c).
along the border: 9 bits are encoded Signpost combines a conference cal-
at each marker side in small black and endar and a navigation system. Users
white squares, carrying 1 bit each. The can query the conference calendar by
frame marker’s specifications arrange day or conference session, or by using
the code in clockwise order such that full-text indexing. Live RSS updates
only one of the four possible rotations received over the air ensure that the
yields a valid code. The remaining part schedule reflects the latest changes. All
of the square isn’t used to decode the calendar entries are linked to locations,
marker and can contain arbitrary con- so users can plan their fastest route
tent, giving graphics designers freedom from the current location (the last seen
for customization. marker) to the desired lecture hall. Sign-
To exploit markers, users must point post displays the results on a map that
the phone’s camera at them (see Figure users can freely pan, rotate, and zoom.
1c). As soon as a marker appears in the Alternatively, in live-tracking mode, the
camera’s view, the system detects and system automatically aligns the map as
decodes it in real time from the live soon as a marker is detected.
video stream. For detection to succeed, We implemented Signpost atop the
each square describing a bit should be Studierstube ES (Embedded Systems)
at least 2 pixels in the camera image. framework,1 as Figure 2 shows. The sys-
Our system can cope with tilt angles of tem runs on Windows Mobile phones
up to roughly 70 degrees, and rotations (Figure 3), independent of screen res-
around the camera’s optical axis don’t olution and form factor. Signpost can
affect the system. These constraints impact the device’s battery life, mainly
are comparable to other marker-based because of its use of the camera and the
tracking techniques. network connection. However, when
no one is using the Signpost applica-
Conference Guide application tion, the system automatically disables
Large events such as conferences often the camera. Hence, battery drain is lim-
challenge participants to find their way ited to when users actively interact with
through vast multistory convention cen- the application. Furthermore, Signpost
24 PERVASIVE computing www.computer.org/pervasiveuses the network connection only when
users explicitly ask to update the con-
ference schedule.
For large events in venues with mul-
tiple levels or buildings, a single map
is no longer sufficient. Signpost, there-
fore, supports multiple maps linked
to a 3D overview or, alternatively, an
interactive 3D representation showing
the current and target locations’ global
geographic relationship.
Deploying the system to a new loca-
tion consists of three steps:
• Create a map and database of marker
locations. On the basis of sketches
or CAD data, create one or more
2D images using maps of the target for the maps, allowing reuse of exist- 2D maps, select preliminary marker
location. The system uses bitmaps ing maps and artworks. On the basis locations and orientations and enter
rather than vector graphics images of gatherable information from the them into a configuration file. This
AprIl–junE 2009 PERVASIVE computing 25
Application
Signpost
Studierstube
scene graph
Studierstube ES
Muddleware
Studierstube I/O Studierstube tracker
Studierstube core Studierstube math
Operating systems APIs
Windows, Windows Mobile, DirectShow, Symbian Camera, OpenMAX, Direct3D,
Symbian, Mac OS, Linus OpenGL ES (1.x, 2.x), OpenGL, Winsock, and so on
Hardware
(CPU, GPU, FPU, display, touch screen, buttons, audio, camera, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth)
ES: Embedded Systems FPU: floating-point unit GPU: graphics processing unit
Studierstube
software
stack
Platform
Figure 2. Software architecture
of the mobile phone client. Our
software framework, Studierstube ES,
provides the application layer with an
abstraction of all platform-dependent
functionalities, allowing for an easier
cross-platform development of
applications.
Figure 3. Examples of phones running Signpost and screenshots of the application: (a) HTC Cingular 8525, (b) Orange SPV E600,
(c) HTC Touch Diamond, (d) HTC S710, and (e) Motorola Q. Signpost supports various form factors and resolutions of the screen,
and different input capabilities (both keypad- and touch-based).Smarter PhoneS
Figure 4. Positioning marker-based localization systems on an ideal localization continuum. This continuum spans from systems
without localization to those with continuous localization.
step can take place offline in a plan- user can get a better understanding of a good solution for navigation when no
ning office without access to the tar- the conference complex by looking at GPS positioning is available.
get location. the 3D view. We recruited 20 users with diverse
• Deploy markers on site. During event cultural backgrounds and varying ex-
preparations, deploy markers on site. Comparison pertise in technology. The users were
Depending on the required accuracy, of Localization techniques between 20 and 34 years old (average
a coarse deployment (± 50 cm) is of- Even though many projects have used age of 25), with half male and half fe-
ten sufficient. For simplicity, mark- marker recognition, we aren’t aware of male. For each of the three conditions,
ers’ horizontal bearing is restricted to any studies that compare marker-based we asked the participants to use the
45-degree steps, which is usually suf- localization with nonlocalized digital maps and the localization system as
ficient when mounting them on walls maps. So, we conducted a study to as- their only aids to reach a specific des-
or poster boards. For those markers sess whether the effort of outfitting the tination. The location of the study was
that can’t be deployed as planned in environment with fiduciary markers the Department of Computer Science
the previous step, update the data- pays off in terms of improvements in at Graz University of Technology (in
base accordingly. user navigation. We compared marker- Graz, Austria)—a complex compris-
• Create a new software release. Fi- based navigation in Signpost with two ing four buildings connected by several
nally, create a new software release conditions that represent the extremes bridges. This complex contains many
by bundling the software with the of the localization continuum, shown repeated features, with a general lack of
updated map and marker database. in Figure 4: a digital map with no local- clear landmarks. We considered it to be
Changes to this data (such as repo- ization and a system with continuous a significant example of a hard case for
sitioning markers or changes to the real-time localization (similar to GPS- navigation in a new environment. To
schedule) that become necessary later based navigation systems). avoid biased results, we ensured that no
can be deployed over the air. We hypothesized that the continuous user had previous experience with the
localization system is significantly eas- buildings. We selected three different
We envisioned a typical usage pattern ier to use than the other systems, while destinations, balancing their difficulty
to be as follows: First, a user browses providing the highest degree of loca- in terms of distance from the starting
the schedule, choosing a desired talk. tion awareness. We also hypothesized point, bridges to cross, and number
Second, by selecting this talk, the user that discrete localization is significantly of floors. The study used a within-
can see its location on the map. Third, more helpful in terms of location aware- subjects design (all test users tried all
when Signpost detects a marker, the ap- ness than the no-localization condition, three conditions) with randomization
plication shows the user’s current posi- while probably requiring more learning (based on Latin squares) of the order of
tion, helping the user to decide how to effort. The study’s overall goal was to conditions and target rooms to avoid
reach the talk. Fourth, if desired, the show that marker-based localization is bias. We gave all users some time to famil-
26 PERVASIVE computing www.computer.org/pervasiveCriteria
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(1) No localization vs.
marker-based p < 0.05 p = 0.945 p < 0.01 p < 0.001
localization
(2)
No localization vs.
continuous p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001
(3) localization
Marker-based
localization vs.
p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001
(4) continuous
localization
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Average ranking
iarize themselves with the touch-screen- For the continuous-localization con- cent confidence intervals. Friedman’s
based application before starting the dition, we didn’t have an indoor equiv- test shows that the effect is significant
evaluation. alent to GPS available. Therefore, we for every criterion (p < 0.001), with
For the no-localization condition, used a “Wizard of Oz” approach: we a high probability that differences in
we implemented a digital map viewer, introduced a hidden operator to manu- scores aren’t due to chance. Figure 5
which lets users pan the maps with a ally control the map’s position and ro- also shows the results of the Bonfer-
finger on the touch screen. In all condi- tation using a second phone connected roni test for post hoc analysis.
tions, each map showed the start and via Bluetooth. A crosshair on the map As expected, the continuous-local-
destination points with crosshairs. showed the user’s current position. ization condition outperformed the
When such locations were outside the This setup proved to be believable, and other two conditions for all criteria.
map’s view, we presented off-screen the users sufficiently concentrated on Surprisingly, though, users found dis-
directions using labeled arrows. Users their devices such that no one noticed crete localization significantly easier
could access each floor’s maps using the trick. Continuous localization was to use than no localization, while re-
keypad shortcuts on the phone. a control condition useful only for quiring less attention. During the user
For discrete localization, we inte- comparison within our experiment, study, we noticed that the localiza-
grated our marker-based solution into and the Wizard of Oz approach let us tion information provided by mark-
the navigation map and presented the quickly build a running system. Even ers helped users mentally register the
live camera video view in a screen cor- if this solution can’t scale to real-world view on the digital map with the real
ner. The map presented each marker’s situations, we considered its scope to environment. Although in the no-lo-
position as a red dot. As soon as the be limited to the described user study. calization condition users looked for
system detected a marker, it automati- After users completed all three matching landmarks in the environ-
cally updated the user’s detected posi- tasks, we asked them to rank the three ment with landmarks on the map, with
tion and orientation, presenting it as a conditions from worst to best, accord- discrete localization, the burden was
labeled icon on the map. However, it ing to four different criteria: ease of reduced to registering the icon on the
didn’t reposition and reorient the map use, ease of learning, required atten- map with the user’s real position and
itself automatically. Our pilot study re- tion, and confidence about the current orientation in the world. This might
vealed that users prefer to rotate and location. For each rating, we assigned explain the ease of use reported for
center the map manually when using a a score of 1 to the worst condition and discrete localization. The results show
system that doesn’t provide continuous 3 to the best condition. Figure 5 shows no significant difference in the ease of
localization. the average rankings and their 95 per- learning between the two conditions,
AprIl–junE 2009 PERVASIVE computing 27
airetirC
No localization Marker-based Continuous
localization localization
Statiscally significant Not statiscally significant
(a) (b)
Figure 5. Subjective rankings of the three localization systems, based on four different criteria: (a) average ranking of the three
localization systems (higher scores indicate better ratings); (b) statistical significance of pair-wise differences (as a result of
Bonferroni post hoc analysis). The criteria were as follows: (1) the system is easy to use, (2) the system is easy to learn, (3) the
system requires little attention, and (4) the system makes me confident I know where I am. Horizontal lines indicate 95 percent
confidence intervals.Smarter PhoneS
Figure 6. Results of 34 anonymous
Average ratings on 7-point Likert scale
questionnaires from MEDC 2007: (a)
Questions 0 11 2 3 4 5 6 7
questions given, and (b) average ratings
Signpost was more useful than a for each question on a 7-point Likert
Q1
conventional map. scale. The vertical lines indicate the 95
percent confidence intervals.
Those black-and-white markers
Q2
disturbed me.
I'd like to see the other users' positions
Q3 personally and to collect question-
on my device too.
naires and usage logs from many of
I was able to quickly access and understand the them. Our overall aim was to deter-
Q4
information (schedule and map) I searched for. mine how useful attendees found the
application. More specifically, we
Q5
I enjoyed using Signpost2007. wanted to learn what worked and
what didn’t, and which features were
Signpost2007 improved my location
Q6 appreciated and which were missing.
awareness.
We also wanted to gain insight into
Signpost2007 should be used on other other research areas, such as pedes-
Q7
events too.
trian navigation.
(a) (b) During MEDC 2007, we collected
34 anonymous questionnaires. At-
tendees marked their answers on a
although discrete localization scored (April 2007), Microsoft Tech Ed Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree)
slightly worse than no localization. In 2007 (June 2007), TechReady6 (Feb- to 7 (strongly agree). Figure 6 presents
our application, we address marker- ruary 2008) and TechReady7 (July the results. All answers were consis-
related learnability problems by intro- 2008). The number of distinct users tent, with only a minimal standard
ducing video tutorials or by providing that installed Signpost on their de- deviation.
on-screen hints (for instance, view- vices rose from 150 at MEDC 2007 At TechEd 2007, we deployed the
finder frames, which are common in to more than 1,000 at TechReady6. application at the request of the con-
photo cameras). To our knowledge, this is the most ference organizers, but we didn’t man-
Finally, user confidence was signifi- widely used phone-based indoor nav- age to get in contact with any of the
cantly higher (p < 0.001) for discrete igation system ever deployed in a real conference attendees.
(marker-based) localization compared environment. At TechReady6, we systematically
to no localization. Thus, compared to At all four conferences, we intro- observed selected users to monitor
a static map, users appear to feel a sig- duced Signpost as the official confer- their behavior patterns, and we per-
nificant increase of location awareness ence guide endorsed by the conference formed recorded, semistructured in-
when provided with a means of veri- organizer. All users were conference terviews afterward. The interviews
fying their position on the map, even attendees who hadn’t seen the applica- focused on several core topics, such as
if coarse and discrete. Our observa- tion beforehand and who didn’t know how Signpost changed the user’s con-
tions during the user study support this us. By deploying our application in ference experience and organization,
conclusion. Although users generally previously unknown environments how well the navigation worked, and
didn’t use markers intensively when and with a large user base possess- how much the small screen limited the
they were going in the right direction, ing untested hardware, we were able application’s usefulness.
markers seemed fundamental for users to collect data from many users in a Finally, during TechReady7, we
who were lost in a wrong branch of the natural environment via anonymous collected usage logs from 74 anony-
building so that they could remap their usage logs, questionnaires, on-field mous users, covering a time frame of
mental model with the real building observations, and interviews. These four days, to better understand how
and restructure their path accordingly. real-world experiments comple- users employed Signpost. We identi-
ment the controlled study presented fied the following core functions: dis-
experiences from earlier. play of 2D maps, visualization of the
real-World Deployment Unfortunately, approaching all us- conference buildings’ 3D models, live
We deployed Signpost at four inter- ers directly wasn’t possible. Yet, we positioning using markers, browsing
national conferences: MEDC 2007 managed to interview some of them of the conference schedule, and full-
28 PERVASIVE computing www.computer.org/pervasivetext search on the conference sched-
ule. Figure 7a shows the percentage
of times users invoked the various
functions. At TechReady7, we also
collected questionnaires from 64
users. In this questionnaire, users
rated the usefulness of the five core
functions compared with the printed
conference booklet, on a Likert scale
4.0
from 1 (useless) to 5 (useful), as Fig-
ure 8 shows.
3.5
In the following, we discuss the ex-
periences gained throughout the four 3.0
conferences.
2.5
Usefulness 2.0
At MEDC 2007, attendees found
Signpost more useful than the conven- 1.5
tional conference map that was part
1.0
of the printed conference booklet (Fig-
ure 6a, Q1). At TechReady6, all sub-
0.5
jects agreed that the application was
very helpful. One user said, “Every- 0
thing I looked for, I used the schedule. 1 2 3 4 5
I used the map, since I didn’t know
where to go in the Hyatt; that was very
helpful.” From the questionnaires at
TechReady7, we can also see gener-
ally high rates for Signpost’s useful-
ness. Most users quickly accessed the
information presented on their device
(Q4). Users consistently enjoyed the
application (Q5), yielding an average
score of 6.6 out of 7. Furthermore, the
AprIl–junE 2009 PERVASIVE computing 29
resu
rep
tnuoc
egasU
Full-text
Browse schedule
search
(18%) (6%)
Live position 2D map (38%)
(27%)
3D model
(11%)
(a)
2D map
Browse schedule
3D model
Full-text search
Live position
(b) Time since user first ran the application (days)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2D map 3D model Live position Browse schedule Full-text search
)%(
gnitar
fo
ycneuqerF
Figure 7. Usage statistics for five core
functionalities (from TechReady7): (a)
percentage of times each functionality
was invoked, and (b) average usage
count of each functionality per user
(relative to the days since the user first
ran the application).
Useless
Slightly useless
Neutral
Slightly useful
Useful
Figure 8. Distribution of ratings on the
usefulness of functionalities (compared
to the printed conference handouts at
TechReady7). All values are oriented
toward positive ones (“useful”), but the
ratings for the 3D model seem to be
Functionality
more spread and generally centered on
“slightly useful.”Smarter PhoneS
attendees strongly believed that Sign- navigation with a black border (see Figure 1). In
post should be used at other confer- To minimize the workload of adapt- addition, they were mounted on spe-
ences as well (Q7), resulting in a score ing to new locations, we didn’t de- cial poster boards, so they were easy
of 6.5 out of 7. sign Signpost to provide textual to spot. For TechReady6, we intro-
navigation instructions. Although duced the frame markers, branded
3D overview map users generally liked the way Sign- with the design of the conference. Al-
Overall, people found the 3D over- post guided them, there were many though they looked significantly more
view not very helpful. For example, suggestions for improvements. For pleasing, they were far more difficult
one user at TechReady6 said, “It is example, one user said, “I think the to spot. For TechReady7, we cor-
cool. It is eye-candy, but for me it biggest thing that would help me was rected this problem by using a differ-
is not helpful. The 2D map is just if it would tell me steps: go down es- ent color scheme. At TechReady6 and
fine.” Another said, “It was interest- calator, turn right ... like some of the TechReady7, the conference organizers
ing, but I didn’t use it to try to find car navigation things, but maybe not deployed only 24 markers over an area
where I was going. I think the model that precise.” As we expected from of four buildings. Although the mark-
is too simplistic.” This trend is also the controlled user study, users gener- ers were placed prominently, they were
evident from the TechReady7 data, ally felt an improvement in their loca- small (15 cm). Surprisingly, all users
where the 3D functionality’s usage tion awareness (Q6). commented that enough markers were
was very low, and the ratings for its available.
usefulness were generally centered tracking accuracy
on 4 (“slightly useful”). A likely Although the marker-tracking system Privacy
reason for this is that the confer- was quite precise, we decided to mount With a system like Signpost, it would
ence area was too large. It spanned the markers only coarsely, to minimize be possible to store all users’ current
an area of four buildings, each with the effort of mounting and measuring. positions on a central server. Q3 asked
two to six levels. Still, all users voted Yet, users were generally satisfied with about the users’ interest in seeing other
to keep the 3D view, because of its the tracking accuracy: “When I looked users on their screen. Here, we noticed
“eye-candy” factor or because it gave at it—immediately I thought wow, this the highest variation among answers.
them a better large-scale overview of is where I am.” One user referred to Discussions with users confirmed our
the environment. the tracking accuracy as “half a meter, expectations that some users have
for the purpose it was accurate enough concerns about their privacy being af-
Small Screen … 2 feet off the door versus 4 feet off fected by such a feature. One user said,
Most users had no problems see- the door really doesn’t matter.” “At a conference it is OK … Or you
ing the overview, despite the small could just enter your conference ID.”
screen size, and they made com- Fiduciary markers Another suggested, “Oh, simply make
ments such as, “That is perfect. I Using fiduciary markers in public ar- it turn-off-able, when you don’t want
wouldn’t want to carry something eas always raises questions concerning to be localized.”
bigger” or “I’d rather use my phone visual clutter. However, most attend-
because I am used to [looking] at the ees didn’t complain about the mark- other Use Cases
Users commonly agreed on alterna-
tive usage scenarios: “Inside buildings,
Although users generally liked malls, etc. There it would be useful.
Outdoors you have GPS, which is al-
the way Signpost guided them, there ready there, and people are used to it.
The key thing would be inside.”
were many suggestions for improvements.
technical problems
small screen anyway.” Yet, another ers, giving Q2 (“Those black-and- Most technical problems were related
user said “Getting an overview is the white markers disturbed me.”) a score to erroneous camera drivers, which
toughest part, in the level of detail of 1.7. Perhaps fiduciary markers don’t unfortunately are common on Win-
that is required.” As expected, some affect conference sites, which are al- dows Mobile phones. Moreover, to
users found it difficult to browse a ready densely decorated with posters work on all Windows Mobile phones,
big map. Interestingly, this seemed and screens, as much as other environ- Signpost must support all various
to wear off as users gained a better ments. At the first two conferences, the screen resolutions, camera resolu-
feeling for the site. markers looked like a checkerboard tions, and aspect ratios (see Figure 3).
30 PERVASIVE computing www.computer.org/pervasivethe AUTHORS
For MEDC 2007, we tried to supply
configuration files for devices tested
Alessandro Mulloni is a phD student at the Graz university of Technology.
in advance, which turned out to be in- His research interests include 3D real-time graphics on handheld devices and
sufficient, owing to brand and model human–computer interaction, especially user-centric design of interaction and
visualization methods for handheld augmented reality. Mulloni has an MSc in
variety. For TechEd 2007, we imple-
computer science from the university of udine. He is a student member of the
mented an automatic detection mod- IEEE. Contact him at mulloni@icg.tugraz.at.
ule for device capabilities, which im-
proved the situation significantly. For
TechReady6 and TechReady7, we also
Daniel Wagner is a postdoctoral researcher at the Graz university of Technol-
implemented a camera wizard that let ogy. His research interests include mobile augmented-reality technology, and
users work around the most common real-time graphics and computer vision for mobile phones. Wagner has a phD
in computer science from the Graz university of Technology. He is a member of
driver bugs.
the IEEE. Contact him at wagner@icg.tugraz.at.
As we solved the most disruptive
problems, new issues emerged. For
example, power consumption due to
camera usage initially didn’t appear
Istvan Barakonyi is a software developer at Imagination Computer Services
to be a problem. However, running GesmbH. His research interests include stationary and mobile augmented-
Signpost with an active camera con- reality applications, virtual reality, and embodied autonomous agents. He has
a phD in computer science from the Vienna university of Technology. Contact
tinuously in the background when the
him at istvan.barakonyi@imagination.at.
phone wasn’t in use quickly drained
the battery.
T Dieter schmalstieg is full professor of virtual reality and computer graphics at
he combination of quanti-
the Graz university of Technology. He’s also an advisor for the K-plus Compe-
tative and multiple quali- tence Center for Virtual reality and Visualization in Vienna, deputy director of
tative studies shows that the doctoral college for confluence of graphics and vision, and director of the
Christian Doppler laboratory for Handheld Augmented reality. His research in-
marker-based indoor navi-
terests include augmented reality, virtual reality, distributed graphics, 3D user
gation provides advantages over simple, interfaces, and ubiquitous computing. Schmalstieg has a phD in computer sci-
manually operated digital maps. These ence from the Vienna university of Technology. He is a member of the IEEE and
the Austrian Academy of Science. Contact him at schmalstieg@icg.tugraz.at.
results also illustrate our approach’s
practicality in real-life use cases. To
our knowledge, Signpost is the first in-
door navigation system successfully de-
ployed at several large-scale venues that guidance system with paper maps. We ACknOwLEDgMEnTS
runs on users’ own mobile phones. We see paper maps as a separate condition
This project was partially funded by the Austrian
received encouraging feedback from from the space (digital maps) we’ve thus
Science Fund (FWF) under contract no. Y193 and
our test audience, despite the reported far examined. Introducing another in- by the Christian Doppler research Association
technical difficulties. dependent variable (paper vs. digital) (CDG).
Backed up by this positive feedback, will require a separate user study and
Signpost is now a commercial product. far more test subjects. Further ongo-
It is adaptable to new events, thanks ing work includes integrating online
to authoring tools that make it easy marketing campaign material by using REFEREnCE
to import existing floorplans. Track- DataMatrix 2D barcodes as placehold-
1. D. Schmalstieg and D. Wagner, “Experi-
ing based on computer vision is cost- ers for Web links, and extending plat-
ences with Handheld Augmented Real-
efficient, as it only requires placing a form coverage. Our ultimate goal is for ity,” Proc. 6th IEEE/ACM Int’l Symp.
few posters with markers at the site Signpost to evolve from a conference Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR
07), IEEE Press, 2007, pp. 3–18.
rather than deploying an active beacon guide to a generic system for indoor
infrastructure. The use of commercial navigation. The application we envision
off-the-shelf camera phones lets users will support a broader range of venues
experience the application on their own and tasks, and will have an embedded
devices, weaving navigation more inti- scripting language to support direct
For more information on this or any other com-
mately into everyday life. downloads of new functions and sce-
puting topic, please visit our Digital library at
In the future, we plan to compare our narios to the system. www.computer.org/csdl.
AprIl–junE 2009 PERVASIVE computing 31