2013 International Conference on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems
SmARTweet: A Location-based smart application
for Exhibits and Museums
Angelo Chianese, Fiammetta Marulli, Vincenzo Moscato and Francesco Piccialli
Department of electrical engineering and information technologies
University of Naples “Federico II”, Italy
Email:{angchian,fiammetta.marulli,vmoscato,francesco.piccialli}@unina.it
Abstract—Inthispaper,wepresent”SmARTweet”,aLocation- and more, can communicate. Exchanged and produced data
basedapplicationdevelopedwithinDATABENC,ahightechnol-
can be opportunely exploited by a set of applications in order
ogy district for Cultural Heritage management. In particular,
to make the system “smart”, and from a more general point
theprojectaimsatexploitingseverallocation-basedservicesand
technologies to realize a smart multimedia guide system able to of view, the social network can be seen as composed of a set
detecttheclosestartworkstoanuser,makethemableto”tweet” of Single Smart Spaces - S3 (indoor museums, archeological
and ”talk” during tourists’ visit and capable of automatically sites, old town center, etc...), each needing particular ICT
tellingtheirstoriesusingmultimediafacilities.Moreover,wehave
infrastructuresandservicesthattransformthephysicalspaces
deployed and tested the installation of some sensors that, using
into useful smart environments [1]. In this context, one of the
Wi-Fitechnology,allowtotheusers’mobiledevicestodetectthe
closestartworkinamuseumenvironment.Onceanartworkhas most important issue is to design location-based applications
beendetected,therelatedidentifierisretrievedandamultimedia that can assist tourists, visitors and citizens in the contextual
storyisdeliveredtouserbymeansofpropermultimediadelivery navigation of an indoor S3, for example automatically de-
and user-profiling techniques, in order to facilitate and make
livering to users multimedia contents related to the museum
morestimulatingthevisit.Theartworksdetectionwasperformed
artworks on the base of their positions. In this paper, we
by a localization algorithm that we designed and tested in our
laboratory rooms. As case of study, we show an example of describe an ongoing project developed within DATABENC 1,
”tweeting and talking artworks” as a location-based application aHighTechnologyDistrictforCulturalHeritagemanagement
ofasculptures’artexhibitionwithintheMaschioAngioinocastle, recently funded by Regione Campania (Italy). In particular,
in Naples - Italy.
the entire project exploits the Internet of Things technologies
Keywords-Smart museum guide; location-based systems; Cul- in order to make the artworks of a museum exhibition able
tural Heritage; to ”tweet” and ”talk” during users’ visit and capable of
automaticallytellingtheirstoryusingmultimediafacilitiesand
I. INTRODUCTION
stored users profiles. Moreover, we have deployed and tested,
The adoption of Future Internet (FI) technology, and in inanindoorenvironment,theinstallationofsomesensorsthat,
particular of its most challenging components like the In- using Wi-Fi technology, allow to the users’ mobile devices
ternet of Things (IoT) and the Internet of Services (IoS), to detect the closest artwork. Once an artwork has been
can constitute the basic building blocks to progress towards detected, the related identifier is retrieved and a multimedia
unified ICT platforms for a variety of applications within the story is delivered to user by means of proper multimedia
large framework of smart cities. In addition, recent issues deliveryanduser-profilingtechniques,inordertofacilitateand
on participatory sensing, where everyday mobile devices like make more stimulating the visit. The artworks detection was
cellularphonesforminteractive,participatorysensornetworks performedbymeansofan”ad-hoc”localizationalgorithmthat
enabling public and professional users to gather, analyse and wedesigned andtested in our laboratoryrooms. In particular,
sharelocalknowledge,seemstofitthesmartnessrequirements thisalgorithmisabletodetect,withhighaccuracy,theclosest
of a city in which also people have to play an active role. artworktoavisitor,exploitingtheRSSIoftheinstalledWi-Fi
Eventually, cloud computing technologies provides a natural sensors.Finally,weshowanexampleof”tweetingandtalking
infrastructure to support smart services. One of the fields artworks” as a location-based application of a sculptures’ art
that can take great advantages of such technologies is the exhibition within the Maschio Angioino castle, in Naples -
Cultural Heritage one. Indeed, Cultural Heritage represents Italy.
a worldwide resource of inestimable value and such a value
The paper is organized as follows: Section II illustrates a
gains more and more importance when embedded into the
motivating example, while Section III describes the architec-
digital ecosystem of a smart city, where persons (citizens,
ture of the realized system. Section IV outlines the main fea-
tourists, etc.) and objects (buildings, rooms, artefacts, etc.)
tures of the location-based application, on which we focused
equipped with appropriate devices (GPS, smart-phone, video
ourattention.SectionVconsistsofabriefliteratureoverview
cameras, sensors, RFID and QR Code tags, etc.) constitute a
particular social network in which all the mentioned entities, 1www.databenc.it
978-1-4799-3211-5/13 $31.00 © 2013 IEEE 408
DOI 10.1109/SITIS.2013.73of technologies similar to those provided by our platform described,ataglance,ascomposedofthefollowingelements:
Section VI provides a case study with some implementation
details and several preliminary experimental results. Finally, • A Wi-Fi network infrastructure, covering the whole
Section VII reports some conclusions and the possible future
exhibit/museum area. Each artwork is anchored to its
work.
own sensor and is enabled to generate a network signal.
In order to deploy the proposed system, we designed a
II. MOTIVATINGEXAMPLE
modular architecture composed of pluggable elements,
To better understand motivations behind our work, it is
such enabling the easy substitution of the Wi-Fi SAPs
important to analyze the kind of relation that exists between
withaWirelessSensorNetworkInfrastructureandBlue-
the exhibition and the visitors of a museum: the purpose of
tooth trans-receivers, directly pluggable on the artworks.
the visitor is to see and learn more and not to explicitly
Each artwork sensor generates a Wi-Fi network signal
use the technology. For these reasons and to better appraise
that will be detected by users mobile devices, equipped
and promote the museum heritage, it should be preferable to
with the SmARTweet application. To overcome the prob-
provide exhibition objects with the capability of telling their
lem of different Wi-Fi signals overlapping, a two phase
story, rather than to wait that users require in first person
indoor localization algorithm was designed to run in the
(throughmultimediaguides)moreinformationaboutanobject,
SmARTweet application environment, to establish which
as per usual in the majority of smart museum scenarios. In
is the artwork closest to the user. Although many and
addition, it should be useful for a user to receive a set of
well-assessed indoor localization solutions are available
suggestions, strongly based on his preferences, for navigating
fromliterature,wedesignedanad-hocindoorlocalization
the physical space in terms of browsing activities. To this
system because our operating context (art exhibitions
aim, we see the opportunity of using a profiling system as a
and museums) needed of light-weight algorithms to be
key element to orchestrate user fruition in the physical space,
executed on a mobile device in very short times.
whiletakingtheburdenofacquiringandprocessingtheneeded
contextual information from surrounding smart sensors.
As motivating example, we can consider the case of a tourist
visiting an art exhibition within Maschio Angioino castle, in
Naples (Italy). The cultural environment offers, by a Wi-FI
connection, a web-based access to a multimedia collection
containing: digital reproductions of sculptures by Francesco
Jerace and other minor artists, educational videos, audio
guides,textualandhypermediadocumentswithdescriptionof
authorsandsculptures.Inordertomaketheuser’sexperience
more interesting and stimulating, the access to information
should be automatically delivered and customized based on
thespecificprofileofavisitor,whichincludeslearningneeds,
level of expertise and personal preferences, on user effective
location in the museum, on the sculpture “similarity” and on
Fig.1. Systemoverview.
information about the context in terms of number of persons
for each room, room fitness, network performances, etc.
• SmARTweet guide application, currently developed to
We can image a situation in which the tourist is walking
run over the Android platforms, with the following fea-
withinagivenexhibitionroomthroughseveralsculpturesand
tures:
whenheisparticularlyclosetooneofthem,itsmobiledevice
detecteditthankstotheWiFisensorplacedonthatsculpture. – allowing users to access into the exhibit/museum
Oncetheobjectshasbeendetectedbytheusermobiledevice, network, in order to enabling the communication
it begin to talk about itself, its sculptor, its story and its process;
statususingmultimediafacilitiesandstronglyconsideringuser – detecting the Wi-Fi signals of the users’ closest
preferences (e.g. only text and images data). artworks ;
In this way, a “static” art exhibition is able to transform itself – running the localization algorithm to establish the
into a “dynamic” one and the talking artworks surround the closest artwork to each user;
visitor in a place are now “animated.” Thanks to the delivery – enabling the winning artwork related multimedia
strategy supported by the WiFi sensors, our system is finally contents retrieval and presentation, exploiting com-
capable of enhancing the user visit satisfaction. munication with the Gateway Server and the Multi-
media Content Server modules, and supporting con-
III. SYSTEMARCHITECTURE tents delivery and fruition processes.
Tweeting museum metaphor is supported by a multitier Aquestionnaireispreliminarilysubmittedtousers,when
system whose architecture is shown in figure 1 and can be theydownloadthemobileapplication,inordertocapture
409his/herprofile(e.g.favoriteartworks,artists,subjects,and applications [10]. In a smart museum scenario, localization
kinds of multimedia) and the device features. of visitors devices is used to decide when and which type
• The Gateway Server (GS) hosts a set of daemon pro- of fruition is more suitable for the visitor, meshed-up with
cesses able to filter and gather information coming from his stored profiling information. Many and well assessed
users devices. Each process manages the communication are the approaches to indoor positioning [11], as in WSN
with a given user sensor. When users devices are near (WirelessSensorNetworks)domain.Inoursystem,weadopta
an object, the localization algorithm starts. It terminates typicalrange-basedlocalizationexploitingtheReceivedSignal
establishing the winning network, corresponding to the Strength Indicator (RSSI). This choice is supported by the
artworkdetectedastheclosestone,oursmartapplication adequate precision of measurements obtained and it’s not
starts a handshake phase with the Gateway Server, to required special or too invasive hardware. Our application
communicate the network identifier of the winning art- scenario requires a discrete accuracy, since localization is
work. When it is notified on the related stream, the GS aimed to identify the proximity of an artwork to the visitor
forwardsarequestforcontentstotheMultimediaContent and not to detect a punctual visitor position. The designed
Server, containing information identifying the requested localization algorithm makes use of Wi-Fi communication
artwork contents and the device to which contents have technologies, exploits a topology built with a set of fixed
tobedelivered.Allinformationaboutcommunicationbe- sensors(anchors)placedoneachartworksbasement,commu-
tweenusersandartifactsareproperlystoredindedicated nicating with mobile sensors that are represented by visitors’
logs. devices. Interaction paradigm is of pull-type; users’ device
• The Multimedia Content Server (MCS) accepts a re- application scans for active networks periodically, in order to
quest for contents from the GS, manages a multimedia start the localization phase.
repository, builds a multimedia story exploiting user Details of this step are described as follows and it is
preferencesandanappropriaterecommendationstrategy, composed of two parts:
andfinallydeliversalltheinformationtotherelateduser 1) Wi-Fi Networks Discovery
mobile App. 2) Winning Wi-Fi Network Declaration
IV. FROMLOCALIZATIONTOUSERPREFERRED
1)Wi-FiNetworksDiscovery: itisperformedbyasoftware
TWEETINGARTWORK
module composed of a set of daemon processes running
Our approach meshes up indoor localization strategies,
on users’ device that manages a periodical scanning process
contents adaptation and recommendation techniques, in order
aimed to seek for all the Wi-Fi networks sensed from users
to support the ”tweeting” artworks metaphor. In particular,
location. Museum Wi-Fi environment was scanned choosing
starting from a preliminary phase of users profiling, we want
an appropriate sampling time, obtained as the result of a
to enable the artworks to tweet and talk, when they are
tuning activity measurements, collected during experiments
recommended as the most meaningful or interesting for a
performedinourlaboratoriesandsimulatingamuseumrooms
visitor, according to his preferences analysis and when he is
topology and artworks placement. Our experiments assessed
inside their surrounding area. When we mention the concepts
the value of 2 seconds as the most suitable value to set as the
of ”tweet and ”talk”, we mean the particular capability of an
consideredWi-FiNetworkenvironmentsampletime.Thisrep-
artwork automatic telling their story to the visotirs, through
resents the starting default value, but it can be the differently
multimedia content such as tailored audio stories, photos and
modulatedaccordingtovariableconditions(visitors’behavior,
videos; all through the sensor placed on it and the installed
e.g, user is running or device is put in pockets). It was
user smartphone App. The stories narrated by the artworks
implemented,intheprototypalversion,usingtheEnvironment
are generated by means of Natural Language Generation StateVirtualSensorAndroidlibrary2,thatallowsrecognition
techniques, in particular by using our customized version
of environmental scenarios in which an Android device can
of the NaturalOWL engine, a project developed in [16]. To
be found. The basic scenarios types are:
make more interesting and amazing an art exhibition, so
The basic scenarios types are:
keeping high users attention levels and encouraging dynamic
• Motion States detection (MotionLess, car, walk, run)
recommendations among the users, we propose a tweeting
• Noise States detection (Noise environment, Noiseless
exhibit/museum model, in which artworks start to ”tweet” to
environment)
the visitors, only when they are next to the them (they stand
• Proximity States detection (Boxed or Unboxed)
inside their surrounding area) and when they are recognized
• RingerMode detection (SilencedMode, NormalMode)
as friends of users.
A. User Localitazion Strategy Output produced by this step of the localization algorithm is
a list of active sensed Wi-Fi networks in proximity of users
In this subsection the designed indoor localization strategy,
device.
adoptedtosupportcontents filteringanddeliveringprocesses,
will be described. Localization of people and devices is
recognizedasoneofthemainbuildingblockofcontextaware 2http://sourceforge.net/projects/environmentstat
4102)WinningWi-FiNetworkDeclaration: thisgamingphase, max dbm *K
}
during which each network races to be the winner, represents
where max dbm is the maximum dbm value between the
the core of the localization algorithm. It takes as input, from
scanned networks, and K is a normalization value suggested
the Network Discovery module, the list of sensed Wi-Fi
by the experimentations.
Networks identifiers, corresponding to the list of artworks
Our experiments were performed with omni-directional
detectedinproximityofavisitor.Then,itstartsthecomputing
trans-receivers; therefore, the proposed localization strategy
process of RSSI values measured in correspondence of each
acts in each artwork surrounding area, so identifying a disk
networkinthelist,inordertoassessthewinningone.Sincewe
coverage area.
aimtocatchthevisitorsperspectiveandbehavior(theartwork
he/shecouldbeinterestedwith)andnothispunctualposition, B. User profiling
theadoptedcriteriaestablishesthatthewinningnetworkisthat Auserprofileisastructuredrepresentationofcharacteristics
one associated to the minimum RSSI value. Such minimum of an user, in order to take into account his needs, goals,
valueisestimatedcomputingaweightedaveragebymeansof and interests. It can be analyzed by using filtering techniques
three succeeding measures of RSSI. Weights were computed that also provide recommendation to the users, to help them
by running a calibration algorithm aimed to tune and refine navigating in the exhibition and retrieving most interesting
the network infrastructure configuration. RSSI measurements information. The approach adopted in SmARTweet (SMart
areconditioned,asknownfromliterature,bytheenvironments ARTwork Tweets) is based on the integration of data that
in which they are performed. In this perspective, during our the system collects about users, both explicitly and implicitly,
experiments, we observed that, more reliable and effective and a classical collaborative filtering technique in order to
RSSI measurements were those sampled in succeeding time produce comprehensive profiles to assign to each user and
instants and differing each other of very low quantities. If provide appropriate recommendations in any context during
for three succeeding times we register a very similar value, a visit of a exhibit/museum. It is implemented by a software
we can assess that the RSSI measure is reliable. Hence, the personalization module, the User Profile Engine (UPE) that
deputed winner network is that one showing the minimum acquirespersonaldataofauser,processesthesedatatoobtain
distancevalueamongitsthreesucceedingRSSIsamples. The additional information, and uses it to modify either content
winning artwork in our localization strategy is represented aspects or navigation capabilities. The adopted profiling and
by that one holding very near RSSI values at least for three recommendation strategy implemented by the UPE module is
succeeding times. To this aim, an observation window holds explained in the following lines. To download and be enabled
threesucceedingRSSIsamples,foreachnetworkappearingin to use the SmARTweet application, users have to fill in a
the input list. Only networks having the observation window prelimirary registration form, used to create and assign them
filled up, can races in the gaming phase; other ones are a profile. This form asks users for explicit information about
discarded from this phase until they will collect again three their attitude to visit art exhibition and museum, in term
succeeding samples. The details of the algorithm follows. of visits frequency and leading motivations of the visit and
The application, running on the users device, owns a map of some typical information, as age, sex, graduation level and
candidate networks. Each network is characterized by a SSID country.Profilingprocessisfurtherenrichedwithinformation
(networkidentifier),asymbolicnetworkname(anamestring), comingfromusersbehaviortracking,performedautomatically
and an Observation Window containing the actual sampling by the system. This tracking process is generally transparent
instant RSSI value and the two previous time instants RSSI to the user and behaviors information are generally stored in
samples.Thewinningnetworkisthatoneownstheminimum a log file. Legacy data provide a further rich source of profile
RSSI value, estimated with a normalized weighted average information for known users. The generated user profiles and
computed on the three RSSI samples. As a software entity, localization information are analyzed in order to recommend
eachanchornetworkissocharacterizedasatriplecontaining: multimediacontentsorsuggestactionstotheuser.Rule-based
andfilteringtechniques[13]arethebestknownforanalyzing
Anchor Network Object=<SSID,
profile data and making appropriate recommendations.
SymbolicName, RSSI ObservationWindow>
C. User ratings based recommendation strategy
The RSSI ObservationWindow is implemented as a three
elements vector, collecting three succeeding RSSI samples: UPE(UserProfileEngine),runningintheback-endsideand
hostedintheMCS,worksasarecommendersystemproviding
RSSI ObservationWindow=[RSSI Value(t k−2), personalized suggestions about artwork contents, evaluated as
RSSI value(t k−1),RSSI value(t k)] interesting for users among the ones in the collection stored
in the MCS database. The recommendations are generated on
where t is the sampling time. The distance function
k
the basis of different types of ratings (human evaluations on
adopted to compute the minimum RSSI values distance for
items)thatthesystemgetsusinganalgorithmofcollaborative
each anchor network follows:
filtering, joining users sharing the same tastes. The ratings
RSSI distance values=abs RSSI value(t k−1)-abs collectedbythesystemmaybebothimplicit[14]andexplicit.
{
[RSSI value(t ) ] / 10 + abs[RSSI value(t )] / InthecurrentversionoftheSmARTweetapplication,amixed
k k
} {
411techniquebasedonimplicit/explicitratingisimplemented.We the artwork tweeting process. Once recommendation process
only consider two types of events, and each one has been terminates, contents identified as the most suitable for the
associatedwithaweightthathighlightstheimportanceofthat user, are retrieved and a communication stream between the
event for collecting information about the user interests: MCS and the users’ device is opened. When winner network
• selection and zooming actions of suggested items is established, visitors’ device, by the App functionalities,
• search for specific contents by a browser included in the sends to the GS a request for contents, containing a couple
application composed by the users’ device network IP Address and the
Ifneitherexplicitnorimplicitratingsareavailable,acollab- winningartworknetworkidentifier.TheGSforwardsittothe
orative filtering technique is used to predict user interests on MCS.BeforestartingtheUPEmodule,apreliminaryfiltering
an cultural object that is not evaluated by taking into account based on localization information is performed. MCS hosts a
the historical dataset on rates of a users community, stored networkmap,collectinglinksbetweentheWi-FinetworksIDs
into a database of existing rating provided by other users. andtherelatedartworks.Oncethewinningartworkidentityis
Such a database is a set of rates u , corresponding to the obtained,therecommendationprocessstarts,computingusers’
i,j
evaluation of user i on the item j. If I is the set of items on profile information and contents related only to the winning
i
which user i has expressed a rate, then its possible to define artwork.TheMCS,includingtheUPEmodule,isimplemented
the average rate for user i as: asaJavaWebApplication,designedaccordingwiththeModel
ViewController(MVC)pattern.Thecommunicationenabling
u = 1 (cid:2) u thecontentsrequestanddeliveryprocessbetweenSmARTweet
t |I i | j ∈I i i,j Application and the MCS is performed by servlets remote
It is also possible to compute the evaluation of the current invocation.
user(thesubscripta)basedoninformationonthecurrentuser
andonasetofweightscalculatedfromtheuserdatabase.We V. RELATEDWORKS
canassumethatthepredictedrateofcurrentuserexpectedfor In the last years, much access to cultural heritage digital
item j, i.e. p a,j , is a weighted sum of rates of other users: presentationstookplaceonthehomepersonalcomputerorin
virtual theaters, often far from the real cultural environment.
p = u + k(cid:2)n w(a,i)(u u )
a,j a i=1 i,j a Virtual museums and virtual reconstructions are examples of
−
where n is the number of user in the database with non such a usage model, where the user experience is confined
zero weight. Weights w(a,i) can reflect distance, correlation, within the software application, in a decontextualized space.
or similarity between each user i and the current user. k is According to this, the authors in [2] propose a system that
a normalization factor such that the absolute values of the is based on temporal data from the museums databases,
weights sum to unit. The expression that identifies the weight and provided the user with powerful data manipulation and
w(a,i) which relates the current user a with user i is: graphical visualisation tools.
The definition and implementation of location based sys-
(cid:2) (u u )(u u )
w(a,i) = j a,j − a i,j − i tems (LBS) able to support users in indoor environments like
√(cid:2) j(u a,j −u a)2 −(cid:2) j(u i,j −u i)2 an art exhibition or a museum is an active and multidisci-
plinary research field.
where summations overj are calculated on all items which
A current trend is to try to improve the cultural heritage
have been evaluated by the users a and i.
experiences by adopting new technologies that support the
UPE stores individual user profiles, but also assigns the
use of mobile devices (smartphone, tablets, etc..), nowadays
users to a kind of stereotype [15], used to group users with
widespread among the people [17]. Since smartphones and
similar characteristics, and therefore to overcome situations
wireless Internet connection became ubiquitous in the last
in which an individual user profile is not yet complete. The
years,locationbasedinteractionsupportedviatheWiFi,WSN
recommendations provided to users belonging to a specific
or Bluetooth identification became a standard methodology
stereotype, are calculated using all ratings available for all
for mobile phone usage, especially in the Cultural Heritage
users belonging to that stereotype. In this way, UPE is able
context,whereitisimportanttolocalizeavisitorwithrespect
to provide recommendations, also to an user that has just
to physical objects.
registered, because in the registration form the user provided
In this scenario, several works have been proposed aiming
enough data to be assigned to a segment, and therefore the
atexperimentthemostpromisingtechnologytolocalizeusers
UPEisabletogive,asrecommendations,thoserelativetothe
andtodeliverytothemthemostsuitablecustomizedcontents.
segment the user belongs to. The recommendation module is
In the following, we report a brief overview of some of these
part of the UPE component, which manages the user profiles
techniques.
and computes the recommendations.
Bihler et al. [4] developed a prototypical context-aware
D. Tailored Contents Delivery museum guide based on Ultrasound Control where the smart-
The whole recommendation process described in the previ- phone is able to recognize the exhibits by receiving a mod-
oussectionistriggeredbythelocalizationsystemthatenables ulated ultrasonic signal, but in any museum an adaptation
the recommended contents delivery process, in order to start of the used frequencies is necessary. The authors of [3]
412proposed a network based ticket reservation system which is thatdisplaysthedeliveredandadaptedmultimediacontentsof
a localization-based smartphone application with augmented the sculptures.
reality. The authors of [5] introduced Personalized Location-
based Traveler Recommender System that provides person-
alized tourism information to its users. As the cities are
filledwithhugebuildingsandnumerouslargestores areopen
underground, most of the people spend most of their time
indoors. Therefore, LBS should be available not only outdoor
but also indoor. Developing outdoor LBS is much easier
than developing indoor LBS (ILBS) because of GPS (Global
PositioningSystem)andMapproviders(Google,forexample).
Since we cannot use GPS or the map in ILBS development,
researches on indoor positioning and floor map (or drawing)
provideservice[6],[7]areactivelybeingperformed.Another
point of view to build a location based smart guide in a mu-
seumistotargetnotjustasingleuserbutalsoagroupvisiting Fig. 2. From left to right: A multimedia story proposed to a visitor in
it. The Sotto voce [8] system is designed specifically with the sculpture surrounding area, a list of the proposed related images, the
possibilitytoratethemultimediacontents.
this goal providing a communication mechanism to support
interaction. Finally, [1] reports an example of location-aware
mobile devices that enable the development of multimedia A. Implementation Details
interactive applications offering innovative experiences to end
Wi-FisensorshavebeendeployedbyusingtheBeagleBone
users. These kind of LBS apporaches often relies on different
Black board, an open hardware product offered by Beagle-
methodologies, in terms of content delivering, related to dif- Bone 3, but at the moment we have not terminated yet the
ferentresearchareas,spanningfrommultimediarecommender
deployment of the sensors within Maschio Angioino rooms.
systems [18], [21] to user modeling systems [20], ontologies
Moreover,weequippedtheseboardswithaBelkinN150micro
andsemanticweb[19],context-awareapproaches[22]andso USBWirelessadapter(802.11b/g/n)4.Wehavechosenthis
on.
board after a careful market analysis; it’s a complete open
According to users localization, sometimes the accuracy is
hardware and software board with a very active community
not so important while in many cases is more important a
that support the users. We are currently redesigning the board
system able to recognize boundaries and positioning a person
inourlaboratories,inordertoeliminateunnecessaryhardware
throughasymboliclocation(e.g.inthemainhallorinthefirst
components on it and therefore reducing the size and power
room).Severalmethodshavebeenproposedtosolvetheprob-
consumption.
lem using different media like infrared beacons [9] or radio
TheGScomponenthasbeenimplementedbyseveralJAVA
signalsfromwirelessLAN[10],[11]RFIDtechnology[12]to
librariesexploitingmulti-threadingfacilities.Inaddition,com-
detect user location. These location based applications create
munication logs have been stored into a proper repository
situations where users can experiment real-virtual contiguity
managedbybythe NosqlDBMSCassandra.The MCScom-
(therealexperienceandthedigitalexperienceareoverlapped)
ponentexploitsad-hocJAVAlibrariestobuildthemultimedia
andenhancedreality(themobiledevicestrengthensthequality
story of a sculpture on the top of the multimedia collection
of the real experience).
managed by PostgreSQL DBMS and on the base of user
preferences appositely captured and modeled as described in
VI. ACASEOFSTUDY Section IV. Finally, a user can interact with our system using
at the moment an Android MGA. The presentation logic is
The aim of these experiments is to implement and test
based on apposite widgets. The client requests are elaborated
a location-based smart system through Wi-Fi based sensors
byJAVAServletsandtheresultsaresenttotheclientinform
and mobile devices, that will be able to guide and assist the
of XML data.
visitors, by exploiting the position of the artworks closest
to them, within art exhibitions and museums. As depicted B. Localitazion Experiments
in Section II, we use as real case study an art exhibition
Inordertotesttheperformanceofthelocalizationalgorithm
within the Maschio Angioino castle, in Naples (Italy). The
in an indoor environment, we carried out a preliminary mea-
multimedia collection is constituted by about 6000 images,
surementcampaignonthefirstflooroftheDatabencResearch
texts and audio files about sculptures of Francesco Jerace and
Laboratory,inNaples(Italy).Wedeployed11sensornodesin
other minor artists. Moreover, we developed, implemented
our laboratory room, as shown in Figure 3, and tested the
and tested the MGA on the Samsung Galaxy S3 Android
localization strategy for 37 different positions of the mobile
phone. Several localization experiments have been performed
inourlaboratory,inordertovalidatethelocalizationalgorithm 3http://beagleboard.org
embedded in the MGA. Figure 2 shows snapshots of our App 4http://www.belkin.com
413device,inordertosimulateatouristvisitamongtheartworks TABLEI
in a museum room. This laboratory room is a typical office MEASUREMENTCAMPAIGNRESULTS
environmentwithoveralldimensionsofapproximately5mby
8m.Thisisaharshenvironmentforwirelesscommunications Measure CorrectDetections WrongDetections %ofAccuracy
becauseofmulti-pathreflectionsduetowallsandinterference M1 34 3 92
M2 33 4 91
due to electronic devices. Detecting the closest artwork to a
M3 37 0 100
visitor is a crucial step of the entire process because after its
M4 35 2 95
localization, the system will deliver the contents to its mobile M5 35 2 95
device, according to its stored profile. M6 34 3 92
M7 36 1 92
M8 36 1 98
M9 34 3 92
M10 35 2 95
insideitssurroundingartworkarea,morethanthe91%ofthe
test cases. Additionally, we observed no significant effects of
interference from other electric apparels in the office, such as
others Wi-Fi access points and mobile telephones; we tested
the algorithm with more than 25 people inside the room,
each of them equipped with its mobile device and we did
not observe significant variations in accuracy, also placing
the majority of people near a specific sensor. Moreover, the
estimated closest artwork was almost always detected and
suggested to the user in less then 8 seconds. According to
theseresults,wehaveconsideredanotherscenariowheresome
artworksareparticularlyclosetoeachother;indetail,instead
ofplacingasensoroneachobject,wehavedeployedanunique
sensor for these group of artworks. In this case, on the user
mobile device, the application will indicate the presence of
an artworks group and therefore the visitor will be able to
choose,lookingtheimagesonthedisplay,whichartworkhave
to ”tweet” and ”talk”. These results encourage the usability
of our localization strategy in a smart indoor environment
where the location based services to be provided are not
strictly connected with the exact position of a user but with
its proximity to the cultural object, because of the presence
Fig.3. Indoortestenvironmentwithselectedsensorpointsanduserpath.
of many visitors in the same room, as we expected in an art
exhibition.
The algorithm, detailed in section IV, aims to localize the
artworkclosesttothevisitor,whenheisinsideitssurrounding C. Recommendation strategy experiments
area. When we talk about the ”surrounding area”, we express
Location-based, recommender and user-profiling systems
theconceptthatwearenotinterestedindiscoveringtheexact
aregenerallycomplexapplicationsthatarebasedonacombi-
position of an user, but identifying his presence inside the
nation of several models, algorithms and heuristics. Recently,
restricted area that surround the artwork. The experiments
researchersbeganexaminingissuesrelatedtouserssubjective
consisted in a set of measures between a sensor-point, that
opinions and developing additional criteria to evaluate these
represent the artwork, and a point of the laboratory map, that
systems. In particular, when a recommender module is in-
represent the visitor mobile device. Each measure collected
tegrated in the system, they suggest that user’s satisfaction
about 1000 RSS measurements, where every RSS measure-
does not always (or, at least, not only) correlate with the
ment was the average of 20 consecutively received samples.
overall recommender’s accuracy and evaluation frameworks
Samples were obtained by sending a beacon packet from the
for measuring the perceived qualities of a recommender and
sensor-point to the mobile at regular intervals, 25 times per
for predicting user’s behavioral intentions as a result of these
second. We received a total of over 18,500 samples for each
qualities should be taken into account. In order to evaluate
of the 37 positions of the mobile node. The accuracy with
the impact of the system on the users we have conducted the
11 Wi-Fi points used in the map is more than adequate for a
following experiments. We asked a group of about 25 people
proximity location based services system as shown in table I.
(all medium experts in art) to visit a virtual reproduction of
During the overall localization measurement, the algorithm is
the exhibit (8 rooms containing the collection of sculptures)
able to detect the proper artwork closest to the user, that is
obtained by the Unity 3D framework and complete several
414TABLEII REFERENCES
COMPARISONBETWEENOURSYSTEMANDNOFACILITIES
[1] F.Amato,A.Chianese,V.Moscato,A.Picariello,G.SperliSNOPS:a
TaskClass Strategy ta (min) nr smart environment for cultural heritage applications, Proc. of the 12th
Q1 Withoutanyhelp 6 4 Int.WorkshopsonWebInformationandDataManag.,pp.49-56,(2012).
[2] Yu-LinChenandTing-ShengLaiandTakamiYasudaandShigekiYokoi
Q1 OurSystem 4 2
Amuseumexhibitssupportsystembasedonhistoryandcultureliteracy,
Q2 Withoutanyhelp 8 5
IJHAC,(6)pp.148-159,(2012).
Q2 OurSystem 6 3
[3] Kang,S.K.,Kang,H.K.,Kim,J.E.,Lee,H.,Lee,J.B.Astudyonthe
Q3 Withoutanyhelp 16 6
mobilecommunicationnetworkwithsmartphoneforbuildingoflocation
Q4 OurSystem 10 4
basedrealtimereservationsystem,InternationalJournalofMultimedia
andUbiquitousEngineering,7(2),pp17-36(2012)
[4] P.Bihler,P.Imhoff,A.B.Cremers:SmartGuide ASmartphoneMuseum
GuidewithUltrasoundControl,ProcediaComputerScience5(2011)pp.
browsing tasks (15 tasks per user) of different complexity
586–592.
(i.e. Low Complexity tasks - Q1, Medium Complexity tasks [5] Husain, W., Dih, L.Y. A framework of a Personalized Location-based
- Q2, High Complexity tasks - Q3) without the help of our traveler recommendation system in mobile application, Intern. J. of
MultimediaandUbiquitousEngineering,7(3),pp.11-18(2012)
system. After this test, we asked them to browse once again
[6] Chon, J., Cha, H. LifeMap: A smartphone-based context provider for
the same collection with the assistance of our recommender location-basedservices,IEEEPerv.Comput.,10(2),pp.58-67(2011)
system and complete other 15 different tasks of the same [7] GyeyoungL.,JaegeolY.AReviewoftheTechniquesforIndoorLocation
basedService,Int.J.ofGridandDist.Comp.,5(1),(2012)
complexity. Each task consists in exploring a certain number
[8] Aoki, P.M., Grinter, R.E., Hurst, A., Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D.,
ofsculpturessatisfyingseveralconstraints.Thecomplexityof Woodruff, A. Sotto Voce: Exploring the interplay of conversation and
a task depends on several factors: the number of objects to mobileaudiospaces,Proc.onHumanFactorsinComp.Sys.,4(1),pp.
431-438(2002)
explore,thetypeofdesiredfeatures(eitherloworhigh-level), [9] Moreno, M.V., Zamora, M.A., Santa, J., Skarmeta, A.F. An indoor
and the number of constraints (genre, author, subject). localizationmechanismbasedonRFIDandIRdatainambientintelligent
environments, Proceedings - 6th Int. Conf. on Innovative Mobile and
A simple strategy has been used to evaluate the results of
InternetServicesinUbiquitousComputing,IMIS2012,pp.805-810.
thisexperiment:empiricalmeasurementsofaccesscomplexity [10] P. Barsocchi, F. Potorti ,P. Nepa Device-Free Indoor Localization for
in terms of number of virtual rooms and time. In particular, AALApplications,MobiHealth2012,pp361-368
[11] Barsocchi,P.,Chessa,S.,Ferro,E.,Furfari,F.,Potorti,F.Contextdriven
we measured the following parameters: (i) Access Time (t )
a enhancement of RSS-based localization systems, Proceedings - IEEE
- the average time spent by the users to visit all the objects SymposiumonComputersandCommunications,pp.463-468(2012)
for a given class of tasks; (ii) Number of Rooms (n ) - the [12] Ye, A., Ling, Y., Xu, L., Yang, X. An improved RFID-based local-
r
ization algorithm for wireless sensor networks International Journal of
average number of visited virtual rooms necessary to visit all
DistributedSensorNetworks(2013)
therequestedobjectsforagivenclassoftasks.Table1reports [13] Schiaffino, S, and Amandi, A, Intelligent User Profiling, Artificial
theaveragevaluesoft andn ,forbothwithoutandwiththe intelligence,pp193-216,(2009)
a r
[14] Claypool,M.,Le,P.,Waseda,M.,Brown,D.ImplicitInterestIndicator.
helpofoursystem,foreachofthefourtaskcomplexitylevels
Computer Science Technical Report Series, WPI Computer Science
defined earlier. Department,Worcester,Massachussets,(2000).
[15] E. Rich Stereotypes and user modeling, User Models in Dialogue
Systems,Springer-Verlag,pp.35-51,(1989).
[16] Galanis, D. and Androutsopoulos, I.: Generating multilingual descrip-
VII. CONCLUSION tions from linguistically annotated OWL ontologies: The natural OWL
system,Proc.ofthe11thEuropeanWorkshoponNLG,ENLG,(2007)
[17] AmatoF.,ChianeseA.,MazzeoA.,MoscatoV.,PicarielloA.,Piccialli
In this paper we proposed a novel location-based platform F.:TheTalkingMuseumProject,ProcediaComputerScienceVol.21,pp.
for the Cultural Heritage domain. The system exploits the 114-121,(2013)
[18] Bartolini I., Moscato V., Pensa R.G., Penta A., Picariello A., Sansone
Internet of Things technologies in order to make objects
C.,SapinoM.L.:RecommendingMultimediaObjectsinCulturalHeritage
of a museum exhibition able to ”tweet” ”talk” during users Applications.Proc.ofICIAP2013,LNCSVol.8158,pp257-267,(2013)
visit and capable of automatically telling their stories using [19] M.Albanese,A.Chianese,V,Moscato,A.Picariello,A.dAcierno:A
MultimediaRecommenderIntegratingObjectFeaturesandUserBehav-
multimedia facilities. In particular we customized the system
ior,MTAP,vol.50,n.3,pp.563-585,(2010)
for an indoor environment like temporary art exhibitions or [20] V.Moscato,A.Rinaldi,A.Picariello:Towardsauserbasedrecommen-
museums, providing to tourists personalized contetnts. Then, dationstrategyfordigitalecosystems,Knowledge-BasedSystemsJournal,
vol.37,pp.165-175,(2013)
we investigated the effectiveness of the proposed approach
[21] M. Albanese, A. dAcierno, V. Moscato, F. Persia, A. Picariello: A
in the considered scenario, based on several parameters. Ex- MultimediaSemanticRecommenderSystemforCulturalHeritageAppli-
perimental results showed that our approach is quite promis- cations,Proc.ofIEEEInternationalWorkshoponSemanticMultimedia
Computinginconjunctionwith(ICSC2011),PaloAlto(CA,USA),(2011)
ing, both in terms of artworks localization and in terms of
[22] G. Boccignone, A. Chianese, V. Moscato, and A. Picariello: Context-
content personalization delivering and therefore encourages sensitiveQueriesforImageRetrievalinDigitalLibraries,J.ofIntelligent
further research. Future works will be devoted to complete InformationSystems,vol.31,pp.53-84,(2008)
the redesign of the board sensor and to finish the deploy of
theentiresysteminthenextmonthsandcollectmorecomplete
and interesting experimental results about the real advantages
of the proposed technology w.r.t to oher approaches, also
consideringtherelatedcostandbenefits,forexampleinterms
of power consumption and maintenance needs.
415