Towards a Generic Platform for Indoor Positioning
using Existing Infrastructure and Symbolic Maps
Kurt Gubi1, Rainer Wasinger1, Michael Fry1, Judy Kay1, Tsvi Kuflik2, Bob
Kummerfeld1
1 CHAI Group, School of IT, Sydney University, 2006, NSW, Australia
kurt@it.usyd.edu.au, {rainer.wasinger, michael.fry, judy.kay,
bob.kummerfeld}@sydney.edu.au
2 University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il
Abstract. One of the important challenges for personalised, context-aware
information delivery within buildings is to be able to show the user a map with
their own location as well as the locations of points of interest for them. One
very desirable property of a personalised, context-aware mobile application is
that it can operate at the same time as preserving the user‟s privacy. To achieve
this, we need to do on-device positioning and personalisation. This paper
presents the design of a platform, and its implementation for the retrieval of
publicly available building data (symbolic maps and associated radio-frequency
infrastructure point locations) for the purpose of coarse-grained indoor
positioning on mobile devices. In comparison to other indoor positioning
systems, this work focuses on the mechanism through which building data is
made available to mobile devices, as too the motivation in providing generic
coarse-grained indoor positioning based on the use of existing infrastructure
and building data.
Keywords: Indoor positioning; symbolic maps; semi-unprepared environments;
client-side personalisation
1 Introduction and Motivation
Location-aware services are becoming increasingly common. A key reason for this is
the growing number of mobile devices that can now determine their location and have
the computational and communication power to deliver sophisticated services.
Examples of such devices are smartphones, eReaders, mobile gaming consoles, in-car
consoles, and netbooks. Most of these devices now come with a variety of inbuilt
technologies as standard: for location sensing, e.g. accelerometer, magnetic field,
orientation sensors, GPS; for positioning and communication, e.g. radio-frequency
(RF) technologies like 3G, WLAN, and Bluetooth; and also for IO, e.g. inbuilt
cameras that can be used for vision sensing, particularly in combination with AR and
QR tags. High-profile investments, such as the European Galileo satellite system thatis currently being built, are an indication of the value that is placed on location-aware
services.
Modern positioning (and navigation) systems now cater for a wide range of
scenarios ranging from in-car, to on-foot, and both outside and inside of buildings
(e.g. [1]). In comparison to outdoor positioning via GPS, indoor positioning is far
less widespread, and there are a number of reasons for this. One reason is the lack of
availability of suitable maps. It is important to appreciate that the creation and
maintenance of indoor maps is inherently different than is the case for outdoor maps.
For example, access to - as well as suitability and privacy of - building blueprints
provides a barrier to entry, meaning that coverage of indoor spaces, e.g. on the scale
of a whole city, is far less accomplished than is the case for outdoor map locations.
This means that we need to explore a different form of mapping approach for indoor
positioning, and this must be able to operate with the type of indoor maps that are
widely available; notably, we believe it must make use of symbolic maps that are
often already available for buildings, despite these often not being particularly
accurate in terms of scale and these often being highly selective in the information
shown on the map.
Another key challenge of indoor positioning follows from the limitations of the
technologies available. While there are several existing and emerging technologies
that have been used in indoor positioning prototypes (e.g. based on RF, visual
technology, dead-reckoning techniques), each of these has its own merits and pitfalls.
None of them, taken independently, have the same planetary-scale applicability, nor
the consistent accuracy that GPS provides for outdoor positioning. This means that
there is still important research to be done to create systems that can make use of a
combination of the available location technologies to achieve effective indoor
positioning of a person as they move around a building. Finally, specialty-built indoor
positioning solutions often require infrastructural (and software) outlays that are not
always feasible.
In this paper, we describe our design for a platform that addresses these problems
and describe its implementation for the retrieval of “publicly” available building data
in the form of symbolic maps and markup of associated RF infrastructure point
locations (though not limited to just RF) like WLAN and Bluetooth.
It can be noted that such a platform and its associated APIs will be an indispensible
building block for web-based user-adaptive systems that contain any type of indoor
positioning component.
In Section 2, we describe the benefits for both providers and users of such a
platform. Section 3 provides an overview of the platform and details of the
implemented proof-of-concept client application for Android smartphones. This is
followed in Section 4 with a summary of related work in the fields of positioning
platforms, and symbolic maps and data modelling. The paper concludes with a
description of future work in Section 5.2 Indoor positioning in Semi-unprepared Building Environments
Buildings are typically constructed based on highly accurate geometric blueprints,
which although useful for architects and builders, are rarely accessible and rarely
relevant (with regards to the detail they show) to general visitors of the building.
Many „public‟ buildings (i.e. buildings that the general public have access to, either
with or without entrance costs attached) do however have maps available to the public
(e.g. consider museums, libraries, theatres, hospitals, and so on). These maps are
symbolic in nature, meaning that they need not align to any geometric model or linear
scale, but instead are specifically designed to highlight aspects deemed to be most
relevant to the user.
Similarly, many buildings are nowadays fitted with a range of RF-based
communication technologies like Bluetooth and WLAN, and although building
administrators may be reluctant to add additional infrastructure specifically for the
purpose of indoor positioning, the modelling of already existing infrastructure may be
an acceptable compromise. We call such environments “semi-unprepared” in that no
additional technologies need be integrated, but the modelling of existing
sensor/beacon points is still required.
Consider the following scenario. Tom, a tourist, is keen to visit a well known local
museum. Upon arriving at the museum, he loads up the RoughMaps application on
his smartphone and is presented with a number of icons on his screen representing
nearby public buildings (e.g. museums, libraries, shopping malls). After Tom has
selected the particular museum of interest, RoughMaps downloads the relevant
mapping data from the web-service via a http request, and presents Tom with a
number of symbolic maps, each one typically showing one level in the museum.
While Tom considers these maps a useful feature, he is unsure of where he is in the
building, so he presses the “Find Me” menu item, and the system positions him on the
relevant sub-map. He is also able to take a photo of any of the QR codes scattered
around the museum to have his position updated on the map. As he walks around, his
position is updated on the map through the use of a dead-reckoning approach that
combines readings from the digital compass and accelerometer sensor (i.e. a
directional pedometer) contained within his Nexus One smartphone.
This scenario describes how a mobile client-device accesses (through a web
service and its associated set of APIs) public indoor map data, to provide an end-user
with symbolic indoor maps and indoor positioning information. Such a service would
enable different mobile device types (including the myriad of smartphones) to provide
personalised context-aware information relating to individual building spaces. Some
of the indoor-based context-aware applications that such a service would enable
include: personalised tour guides, recommendations for paths to follow and POIs to
see (e.g. based on crowd-sourced data), detailed information pop-ups on nearby and
relevant POIs, and educational treasure-hunt games for exploring indoor spaces.3 Server-side Platform and Client-side Demonstrator
This section describes the platform through which building data is made available to
mobile clients and the proof-of-concept client application for Android smartphones.
There are two main components described in the above scenario, namely: a web-
service that allows for the „publishing‟ of symbolic map data and associated sensor
location points; and an API/client-interface that allows for such map data to be
downloaded and interpreted by mobile applications (and foreseeably also web clients
in the future). These components are shown in Figure 1A. Figure 1B shows the
interface in which building data in the form of floor plans and sensor/beacon-location
markup can be published to the server, while Figure‟s 1C and 1D show how such map
data is selected and downloaded by the user from a client device. It should be noted
that certain complexities have been left out of the client-side implementation thus far;
in particular, the client-side application only uses QR codes and dead-reckoning to
provide indoor positioning information back to the user. This implementation is
however clearly extensible to the sensing of additional beacons such as those based on
RF technology, and the overarching mechanisms in which other applications and
web-services are able to access the symbolic map data are also left unaffected from
client-side implementations.
Fig. 1. Client-server architecture (A), the web-interface allowing building administrators to
publish building data (B), and map data being selected and downloaded by the end user (C, D).
The generic indoor positioning component described in the scenario above is
relevant to a broad range of mobile systems. For example, in [2], a subset of mobile
systems are described, namely adaptive mobile guides, and it can be noted that all of
the systems described in that work, ranging from museum guides and navigation
systems to shopping assistants, use location as part of their application context.4 Related Work
This work most closely relates to the intersecting fields of indoor positioning
platforms, symbolic map use, and data modelling techniques for indoor spaces.
Indoor Positioning Platforms: A number of indoor positioning platforms have been
created over the past two decades. The Active Badge system (1992) [3], MIT‟s
Cricket system (2000) [4], BlueStar (2004) [5], and the Personal Navigator (2004) [6]
are important examples of such systems.
The Active Badge system represents a class of indoor positioning system in which
end-users are required to wear tags that broadcast their location to a centralized
service through a network of sensors. The Cricket system, in contrast, represents the
class of indoor positioning systems that are based on a decentralized approach, which
has the particularly important property of being privacy preserving. In this case, the
user carries a specially-designed listening device, which estimates its distance from
nearby positioning beacons. The BlueStar and Personal Navigator systems take this
basic idea further by allowing the client-side „location-sniffing‟ device to be an off-
the-shelf commodity phone and/or PDA. Given the importance of location privacy,
we have taken a similar location-sniffing approach to BlueStar and Personal
Navigator. We move beyond the previous work in that we make use of a range of
facilities that are available on the user‟s smartphone, with various APIs to allow for
generic implementation by any number of 3rd-party applications designed for mobile
client devices (and foreseeably also mobile web services).
Symbolic Map Use and Data Modelling Techniques for Indoor Spaces: Research
into human cognition has identified the use of landmarks for positioning and
navigation as immensely useful. In [7], a number of papers are surveyed in which the
importance of human conception of space as a collection of familiar landmarks has
been shown both behaviourally (e.g. for newcomers to a city) and cognitively. Indeed
in [8], it is described how human cognitive maps - by their very nature of needing to
find a balance between storing as much useful information as possible against the
need to keep the amount of information at a manageable level - emphasise some
information at the expense of other data.
Tourist maps, for example, are quite often symbolic in nature, and this is often
done to increase the salience of map features that are deemed relevant to the viewer,
at the cost of decreasing the salience of the remaining map features/detail. It is this
form of graphical symbolic map, which quite often bears little resemblance to the
geometric blueprints of the buildings they represent, that we place at the heart of this
work and its associated server-side platform and client-side demonstrator.
The Yamamoto map modelling toolkit [9] is one solution that can be used for the
modelling of indoor spaces. Yamamoto provides support for the geometric modelling
of architectural ground plans through polygon meshes. It is a desktop application
written in C# for the .NET framework and has many features that would make it an
ideal tool to use, though does not currently offer its functionality in the form of a web
service, and would thus require users wishing to upload map data to first download
and install the toolkit. Yamamoto also does not focus specifically on the modelling ofsymbolic maps that may bear little resemblance to their associated geometric building
blueprints.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper provides a number of outcomes. Firstly, it describes a platform that allows
for single-point of access for downloading publically available indoor mapping data.
Secondly, it provides the mechanism in which sensor/beacon location information can
be utilised for coarse-grained indoor positioning. Thirdly, it makes use of a developed
API and a sample client-side Android implementation of those APIs to demonstrate,
as proof-of-concept, how to use the platform.
Future work will focus on continued implementation of the markup notation used
to model infrastructure points; surveys into the level of infrastructure that different
types of public buildings currently contain; and usability studies into what minimal
level of accuracy is required for indoor positioning to be considered useful by end
users.
This work is funded by the Smart Services CRC, as part of the Multi-channel
Content Delivery and Mobile Personalisation Project. We would also like to
acknowledge the Australian Museum whose floor plans are shown in this paper.
References
1. Krüger, A., Butz, A., Müller, C., Stahl, C., Wasinger, R., Steinberg, K-E., Dirschl, A., The
Connected User Interface: Realizing a Personal Situated Navigation Service. In: Proc. of the
9th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 161 – 168 (2004)
2. Krüger, A., Baus, J., Heckmann, D., Kruppa, M., Wasinger, R., Adaptive Mobile Guides.
Chapter in: Brusilovsky, P., Kobsa, A., Nejdl, W. (eds.): The Adaptive Web: Methods and
Strategies of Web Personalization, pp. 521 – 549, Springer (2007)
3. Want, R., Hopper, A., Falcão, V., Gibbons, J., The Active Badge location system. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 10 (1), pp. 91 – 102 (1992)
4. Priyantha, N., Chakraborthy, A., Balakrishnan, H., The Cricket Location-Support System, In:
Proc. Of the International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 32-43
(2000).
5. Quigley, A., Ward, B., Ottrey, C., Cutting, D., Kummerfeld, R., BlueStar, a privacy centric
location aware system. In: IEEE Position, Location and Navigation Symposium, vol. 1
(2004)
6. Wasinger, R., Krüger, A., Multi-modal Interaction with Mobile Navigation Systems. In: W.
Wahlster (ed.): Special Journal Issue "Conversational User Interfaces", it - Information
Technology, vol 46, number 6, pp. 322 – 331, Oldenbourg (2004)
7. Bidwell, N. J., Lueg, C. P., Creating a Framework for Situated Way-Finding Research. In
APCHI, pp. 40 – 49 (2004)
8. Golledge, R. G., Wayfinding behavior: cognitive mapping and other spatial processes, The
Johns Hopkins University Press (1999)
9. Stahl, C., Haupert, J., Taking Location Modelling to new Levels: A Map Modelling Toolkit
for Intelligent Environments. In: 2nd International Workshop on Location- and Context-
Awareness. In: M. Hazas, J. Krumm, and T. Strang (Eds.), pp. 74 – 85, Springer (2006)