International Journal of Business Management and Commerce                                        Vol. 2 No. 4; August 2017 
1 
 
Museum Marketing and Disability Access 
 
 
Rebecca McMillen, M.A. 
Fresno Pacific University 
1717 S. Chestnut Ave. 
Fresno, CA 93702 
United States of America 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This article examines museum marketing and disability access, specifically the variety of ways 
museums market their accessible programs to people with disabilities. Five prominent U.S. art 
museums were selected to investigate the marketing methods they use to promote access to 
audiences with disabilities. The results indicate that word of mouth and the use of technology, 
such as websites and social media, were the most common forms of marketing methods used to 
reach people with disabilities. These findings provide museums and the disability community with 
valuable insight about what accessible amenities, programs, and events museums are currently 
offering and the avenues by which museums market them.  
 
Keywords: Marketing, Museums, Disability Access, Social Inclusion   
 
1. Introduction  
 
With the development and implementation of the American‟s with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990, and the 
document Everyone‟s Welcome: The Americans with Disabilities Act and Museums published in 1998, museums 
have been encouraged to focus on producing innovative exhibition designs and programs that offer user-
friendliness, accessibility, and rich learning opportunities for all museum visitors (Constantine, 2007). Additional 
accessibility documents have surfaced since, such as the Access for All Self-Assessment Toolkit (2004) published 
by the Museums and Libraries Archive, indicating that the United States of America (U.S.) museums are not 
alone in their pursuit of accessibility. Legislation in more than twenty-five countries has been enacted to protect 
the rights of people with disabilities (Constantine, 2007). Australia and the United Kingdom have their own 
versions of the ADA, called the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA), both of which are fashioned closely after 
the ADA (Disability Rights, 1998).  
 
To abide by the law, museums have had to make changes to ensure that all people, including those with 
disabilities, have the same opportunities and experiences as everyone else. Museums have also continued to 
evolve over time as society shifts and changes. Over the past decade, museums have focused more and more on 
their disability access offerings with an increased focus on museum marketing (Taheri, O‟Gorman & Baxter, 
2016). 
There is increased awareness and research regarding the importance of disability access in art museums (Sandell, 
Dodd, & Garland-Thomson, 2010). In this article, disability access is examined along with the ways that 
museums market to people with disabilities. The goal of this research is to provide information about some of the 
current accessibility practices in museums and how these are being marketed to the disability community. This 
may assist museums in developing relevant and creative marketing strategies and in turn attract broader 
audiences.  
 
There is a myriad of ways that museums can market themselves, however, it was evident through this 
research that the two primary methods used to market to people with disabilities are by word of mouth 
and through the use of different technologies.  

©Center for Contemporary Research                                                                                             www.ijbmcnet.com 
2 
 
 
As they have adjusted their missions and goals to be accessible to all, there have been continued efforts to 
implement more specific marketing strategies to audiences with disabilities, many of which are discussed in this 
article. However, there are still opportunities for art museums to further advance disability access. This research 
provides greater awareness about what accessible amenities, programs, and events museums are offering and 
the ways by which museums market them.  
 
This article is organized into five sections. The first section provides an introduction outlining the general topic 
and data collection strategy. The second section includes the literature review, which builds a theoretical 
framework and outlines museum marketing and advertising strategies. This section also discusses museum 
branding and current museum marketing trends. The third section overviews the research methodology as it is 
applied to this research and includes information about the sampling strategy, the interview process, and data 
analysis procedures. The fourth section presents the research findings and the final section contains 
the discussion and conclusions that focus upon the implications of the research results and offers suggestions for 
additional research.  
 
2. The Changing Museum  
 
The definition of museums has changed over time as society has also changed (ICOM, 2014). Museums have 
transformed from object-based collections to people-based institutions (Komarac, 2014). Today, museums aspire 
to meet the needs and wants of its visitors (Komarac, 2014). As such, a number of museums are determined to 
improve visitor experiences (Kawashima, 1999). Despite these efforts some museums fall short in building 
loyalty from their audiences and attracting new visitors (Balloffet, Courvoisier & Lagier, 2014).  
 
Balloffet et al. (2014), suggested that four primary things have forced museums to modify their marketing 
strategies and offerings to different audiences: (1) the ease of travel; (2) the mass production and easy access of 
cameras; (3) the invention of radio and television, and (4) the digital revolution. These advances in society 
provide people with access to previously closed “cabinets of curiosities,” (Mauriès, 2002, p. 10) which can 
typically be explored in a variety of ways, including electronic media. Now, more than ever, this is also true for 
people with disabilities in the variety of ways as they can now access museum collections and information 
through new digital technologies.  
 
As institutions that belong to a broader cultural leisure market, art museums are strongly influenced by visitors 
who seek immersive experiences (Conway & Leighton, 2012). This has encouraged museums to switch their 
historical focus on collections by providing visitor-friendly experiences. Marketing is no longer an optional 
instrument but is a survival tool by which to generate new or repeat visitors (Rentschler & Hede, 2007).  
 
According to McCall (2002), marketing is the different ways that a company or organization reaches a 
prospective client or customer. In other words, marketing is “everything an organization does to facilitate an 
exchange between itself and its customers/clients,” (McCall, 2002, p. 1). In this article, the term „marketing‟ is 
used as a broad term to include the myriad of methods museums use to promote their goods and services. 
3. Marketing and Advertising in the Museum: A Theoretical Approach  
 
The foundational period of museum marketing occurred in the mid-1970s until the mid-1980s Rentschler (2002). 
However, as society has shifted toward instant gratification, today‟s museumgoers tend to “want it all and want it 
now” (Mencarelli, Marteaux, & Pulh, 2010, p. 331). As such, some museums integrate education and 
entertainment in their offerings, referred to as „edutainment‟ (Addis, 2005). The edutainment experience is a form 
of entertainment in which individuals learn at the same time (Addis, 2005). The influence of edutainment has 
spread rapidly not just in the arts and cultural industry, but also in society due, in part, to emerging technologies 
(Addis, 2005). The „e-factor‟ or entertainment factor has quickly become a driving force in the global economy 
and offering entertaining content and experiences is becoming imperative to capture the public‟s attention 
(Balloffet et al., 2014). Consumers now desire memorable experiences that they can connect to on a personal 
level.  
 
Not all museum professionals, however, have embraced edutainment. Kotler, Kotler and Kotler (2008), argue that 
many museum staff believe that implementing entertainment will hinder the very mission of museums.  
 
While some museum professionals are in favor of edutainment, others doubt the benefits of excessive 
“spectacularization” and believe that an experience-centered approach will compromise their offerings (Balloffet 
et al., 2014, p. 11). 

International Journal of Business Management and Commerce                                        Vol. 2 No. 4; August 2017 
3 
 
Pine and Gilmore (1999) suggest that the more effective the experience is in being able to engage all the senses, 
the more memorable it is likely to be. This provides creative possibilities for museums in regard to implementing 
marketing strategies for people with disabilities, particularly since they often rely on heightened senses to 
navigate the world. The tendency of society to want everything „now‟ also explains why museum audiences are 
turning to time-efficient arrangements (Mencarelli et al., 2010). This has led to greater technological 
developments in museums leading to the emergence of virtual museums. Museums now have greater interest in 
the digitalization of their collections because they want to make the content of museums accessible to the wider 
public in a more attractive way (Styliani, Fotis, Kostas & Petros 2009), and this includes to those with disabilities.  
 
Once thought of as a potential threat to museums, virtual museums now receive high recognition. Virtual 
museums have become a welcome opportunity to spread a museum‟s message to a more diverse audience, and are 
in turn, an enticing reason to visit the physical museum. Carrozzino and Bergamasco (2010) even advocate the 
use of immersive virtual reality (VR) in museums. “VR is nowadays more and more used as education…or 
storytelling tool” (Carrozzino & Bergamasco, 2010, p. 453). Contemporary museum visitors are constantly in 
search of intelligent, fun, interactive education and of overall immersive experiences. An example of new 
technologies used in museums to promote different sensory experiences and exciting leisure activities, is the use 
of telepresence robots. Such technology, in the future, may provide real time experiences to people who may not 
be able to visit the museum for a variety of reasons. For example, children who are hospital bound who would 
like to attend the museum but cannot due to health reasons could benefit from robotic tours where the robot 
moves around the museum to view the artworks in an enticing and interactive way.  
 
Some museums are using new programs as marketing tools to reach specific audiences with disabilities. For 
example, 3D printing technology allows museums to print 3D replicas of museum objects, whereas others offer 
verbal descriptions, and touch tours for people who are blind or visually impaired. These programs and others 
enable visitors to engage with the museum and its collection by using senses, such as touch, while also utilizing 
new and emerging technologies. Other examples include tactile areas for the blind or visually impaired where 
tables are set in areas around the museums that contain objects or artworks for people to touch and explore. The 
popularity of iPads has led to new methods of reaching audiences. For example, visitors can now access closed 
captioning, audio, larger images, or even sign language to assist with a tour through a museum. These offerings 
can be marketed specifically to those in the disability community and are just some of the ways that museums use 
marketing strategies to broaden their audiences and to brand their own image as an organization. 
3.1 Museum Branding  
 
In the marketing industry, there are different types of brands (Scott, 2000). According to Scott (2000), museums 
fall into the category of „values‟ or a brand that has a lasting central purpose and attempts to create an enduring 
connection with segments of the market sharing the same values (2000).  
 
Brand identity is separate from brand image (Aaker, 1996). Brand identity generally relates to how the 
organization defines itself whereas brand image relates to how the consumer perceives the organization and its 
products (Pusa & Uusitalo, 2014). Museums, therefore, should actively manage their brand identity instead of 
allowing their brand image to dictate the brand. According to Aaker, brand identity can be assessed in the 
following ways: product, person, symbol, and organization (1996). When the museum is viewed as a „product,‟ 
there may be both a core product and an augmented product. For example, museum collections and exhibitions 
would be considered the core product and museum‟s services, such as education programs, the augmented 
product. Even museum‟s target audiences, including people with disabilities, may be a product feature of a 
museum.  
 
More museums are turning to marketing and branding to assist in broadening their audience base. The value of the 
museum‟s brand closely relates to its perceived quality or the visitor‟s perception of the museum‟s overall quality 
or service (Caldwell, 2000). Perceived quality is considered the most significant factor in defining the strength of 
a brand (Gale, 1994; Aaker, 1996). Brands that achieve greater earnings are those that have convinced customers 
that they offer a quality product or service (Gale, 1994).  
 
McNichol suggests that museums need to be “creative and visionary nonprofit organizations that continuously 
strive to meet the needs of the communities they serve” (2005, p. 241). Not surprisingly, this is the goal for many 
museum staff currently seeking new ways to market their accessibility programs to audiences with disabilities, to 
ensure the perceived quality of the museum remains high in the minds of potential audiences.  
 

©Center for Contemporary Research                                                                                             www.ijbmcnet.com 
4 
 
Museums are structures that create meaning and must continue to provide meaning and direction for their 
potential audiences (Daft & Weick, 1984). By considering their target audiences in marketing and branding 
strategies, and by involving and inviting these audiences to assist in some of the program offerings, museums are 
more likely to be perceived as a quality organization worthy of a visit. 
 
3.2 Museum Marketing Trends  
 
Museums face fierce competition from other entertainment and cultural attractions, including restaurants, sports 
arenas, theaters and shopping malls, and even from cyberspace, i.e., the Internet. The contemporary consumer 
continuously pursues new experience and organizations must continually adapt their marketing approach to meet 
consumer expectations. Under relational and experiential marketing approaches, consumers are targeted to 
promote the actual, in-person experience of museums (Colbert & Courshesne, 2012). 
 
However, not everyone is convinced of the wholesale use of museum marketing, fearing a process of 
manipulation akin to what may be found in the business world (Kesner, 2006). They fear that museums may 
become seen as products (Kesner, 2006). Kesner argues that the museum experience can be turned into a 
commodity in which it is expected to package and deliver to audiences, overlooking human and cultural aspects 
(2006). 
 
The current climate for museum marketing is largely one that aims to produce an immersive visitor experience 
that can be created by using technology and creative ideas. From guerilla-marketing campaigns, to moving 
museums to sites that better suit their demographic target audience, to establishing corporate work places, to 
building business and social services partnerships, museums are rethinking their marketing strategies. For 
example, a large East coast museum has in the U.S, partnerships with local hospitals and medical groups whereby 
they host small groups of people who are ill or physically incapacitated to enter the museum after hours to view 
artworks. Such events are planned and tailored to the specific needs of those who are ill, have disabilities or both. 
 
4. Research Methodology  
 
This qualitative research is an emergent methodology research design. Two research questions have been 
undertaken as follows:  
 
1. In what ways do museums advertise and market their accessible offerings to people with 
disabilities? and  
2. What tools do museums use to market their accessible offerings to those with disabilities?  
 
Semi-structured phone interviews of art museum staff from five art museums across the United States of America 
were conducted. Questions were asked regarding the implementation of, and dedication to, disability access 
within the participant‟s museum, including the advertising and marketing of disability access for museum visitors. 
Data was also collected from each participating museum‟s website. A descriptive analysis was conducted of the 
website‟s accessibility information, including the types of accessible programs and services offered by each 
museum.  
 
4.1 Sampling Strategy  
 
To provide rich information about the advertising and marketing of access offerings in museums, staff who 
oversee, or work in disability access departments of the museum, were interviewed. While the responsibility of 
access and inclusion in museums is typically the charge of all museum staff and administration, museum staff 
delegated with these specific responsibilities were contacted, including those who had direct responsibilities for 
producing access programs, tools, and offerings and those charged with the advertising and marketing of these 
services to audiences with disabilities.  
 
Five museums were selected based on their known and established accessibility programs and offerings for the 
disability community. Geographical location was also taken into consideration and the museums selected for 
research were those that spanned the United States. The purpose of this was to establish a broader view of 
museum disability access marketing across the country.  
 
Two museums were on the East coast (Museum A and Museum B); one in the Mid-West (Museum C); one in the 
Mountain region (Museum D) and one on the West coast (Museum E).  
 
 

International Journal of Business Management and Commerce                                        Vol. 2 No. 4; August 2017 
5 
 
Data were analyzed logically, demonstrating that themes stemming from the data were not pre-determined 
(Janesick, 1994). In the first stage of coding, written transcripts of the audio-recorded interviews were read by the 
researcher to establish if there were any similarities or differences between data. Similar data was then grouped 
together and the text was then manually coded to classify the grouped data (Berg, 1989). After further 
examination of the data, information emerged which revealed noteworthy findings regarding marketing and 
advertising, disability access and social inclusion. Several codes developed in the initial analysis of interview data 
contributed to the emergence of 10 broad themes or categories.  
 
For many visitors, museum websites are the first point of reference when seeking new information. Websites, 
therefore, provide an important opportunity for museums to communicate their accessibility, inclusiveness, and 
disability programs. Each museum‟s website, therefore, was analyzed to determine how the museum uses their 
website as a marketing tool. Data was entered and organized into a table of all participating museums and 
included: the museum‟s name, the visibility of the accessible information on the website, the clarity of the 
accessible information, and types of accessible programs and offerings of the museum. Text analysis was 
conducted on each museum to identify which museums had the same accessible offerings and information on 
their websites. This information was then compared against the museum staff interviewee data regarding 
marketing and accessibility as a form of triangulation to help validate the information. 
 
5. Results from Interviews and Website Data  
 
Ten broad themes emerged from the data and in no hierarchical order they were: (1) museum 2) access/inclusion 
for all, 3) access tools/services, 4) access technology, 5) barriers to access, 6) facilitators of access, 7) benefits of 
access, 8) marketing/advertising, 9) audience development, and 10) measuring assess. These themes were 
analyzed focusing on marketing for disability access in art museums. From these themes, two marketing areas 
emerged: word of mouth and outreach, and technology marketing.  
 
5.1 Word of Mouth and Outreach Approach  
 
The five museums that were investigated carried out their word of mouth marketing to people with disabilities 
through a variety of methods, such as outreach to local schools for the blind. For example, a Museum D staff 
member stated, “We have a local school for the blind … and I‟ve worked with them as well as another school for 
blind children to invite them to the museum because … a lot of the time there‟s people who have never been 
before especially if it‟s a visual art museum and so you think about people with low vision might not necessarily 
feel comfortable, so how can we kind of cross those boundaries.”  
 
Some museum staff contacted local businesses that cater for people with disabilities. For example, one museum 
reached out to a local Autism community store and advertised to parents of autistic children about the programs 
and tools that the museum offers for autistic audiences. Interviewee from Museum D said, “For the Low Sensory 
Morning for families with kids with autism, I reached out to different parent‟s groups that were in the city that we 
knew of. We also have a local store … that sells different therapeutic materials and toys for kids and therapists ... 
talking to parents saying, „do you want a program?‟ ... ok, then what does that look like?”  
 
Some museum staff commented on the power of word of mouth marketing: “A lot of it [marketing] is kind of 
word of mouth … we have different parent‟s groups that are support groups for people with disabilities …we send 
things out thanking them saying „share this among your group,‟” and “Just having someone out in the community 
more talking to more people about the programs that we have at the museum and then kind of just word of mouth 
from there has really increased.”  
 
Other examples of word of mouth outreach included contacting local deaf community groups, and even recruiting 
docents from the disability community to help participate in museum activities and promote specific programs to 
people in the disability community. Staff noted the importance of a diverse museum staff so that people with 
disabilities feel comfortable. “So, for our programs for deaf people we really try and ask our deaf educators or 
American Sign Language (ASL) educators to help us spread the word through their networks and to get their 
advice on…where to advertise,” (Museum C), “The volunteers and staff that people interact with at the museum 
should reflect the population for people to feel comfortable. So, I‟m really trying to recruit docents with 
disabilities too.” (Museum B).  
 
 

©Center for Contemporary Research                                                                                             www.ijbmcnet.com 
6 
 
All five museums had goals to be „accessible to all‟ and they carried out some form of formal marketing and 
promotion of museum‟s accessible offerings through technological or electronic means. All museums utilized 
their own websites to advertise their programs and make accommodations for people with a variety of disabilities. 
In addition, other community websites were used to help cross-promote accessible offerings. For example, the 
Cultural Accessibility Consortium serves the disability community in promoting all kinds of programs and events 
that cater for those with disabilities in the Midwest, hence, the Midwest museum also promoted themselves on 
that website.  
 
Social media was another important tool used to promote accessible offerings. All the museums had Facebook, 
Twitter, and Instagram accounts and some used additional social media sites, such as, Pinterest, YouTube, and 
Tumblr. A staff member from Museum E said, “So social media really helped us get the word out … social media 
as a means of getting it out there and then it kind of takes a life of its own through creating a Facebook events 
page for that tour. Then as people join, say that they‟re going to the event, they‟ll tag their friends and then their 
friends will join. So, it just creates a bit of a cascading domino effect.”  
 
In addition, personalized emails and large-scale email campaigns (e-blasts) to lists of targeted contacts interested 
in accessible offerings were used to market museums services and programs. “We also do emails, targeted emails 
by audience about…upcoming programs and then include those audiences in programming like our upcoming 
festivals … we make sure to target our list of audiences with different disabilities there as well and really also do 
other kinds of outreach to connect people and not just like tell people about it in a passive way.”  
 
Museum D also had its own blog to help promote the museum‟s offerings. A staff member at this museum said, 
“We have a blog that we will blog through and we‟ll share information about our events … but I think we need to 
be a little bit more creative with how we‟re really targeting specific parts of our community through those posts.”  
 
Additional marketing included print advertising, such as brochures and calendar of events and guides. Museum A 
created an Access Guide, which included every program, event, and accommodation that the museum had for 
people with disabilities. This was updated twice a year and available in printed form as well as available for 
download from the museum‟s website.  
 
Two out of the five museums had their own mobile phone applications (apps), which were available to download 
on a visitor‟s smartphone. App users could access all the same information that is available on museum‟s websites 
regarding its collections and exhibitions along with all programs and events. For Museum A, disability access 
staff were involved with the design of their custom-made app from the beginning, helping to optimize visual 
accessibility and make it compatible to screen readers and to ensure the content was accessible.  
 
A Museum B‟s staff member noted that in some of their general audience advertisements they included images of 
people visiting museums who have disabilities in order to show people with disabilities, that people who visit 
museums „look like them.‟  
 
Each participating museum regarded their websites as effective marketing tools to reach audiences with 
disabilities. All but one of the participating museums had accessibility information prominently displayed through 
either one or two clicks. Museum B required website viewers to click through three pages of their website and 
then scroll to the bottom of a page to learn about the museum‟s accessibility and disability program information. 
In all other museums, access information was easily found under tabs, such as, „Visit‟ or „Plan Your Visit‟. In 
addition, all the participating museums‟ websites had a clear layout of the accessibility information, including 
general information about physical access to the museum and museum services.  
 
Three of the five museums also had a clearly positioned statement about the museum's commitment to include all 
visitors, including those with disabilities. This was evident by the manner which these museums communicated 
their services to all patrons. For example, information tailored to different segments of the disability community 
were clearly organized under sub-headings, such as „For Individuals who are Deaf or Hard of Hearing‟ or „For 
Individuals who are Blind or Visually Impaired‟ or „For Individuals Living with Dementia‟ or „For Individuals 
with Limited Mobility.‟  
 
Each museum displayed services and/or programs for the blind or visually impaired, for the deaf and hard of 
hearing, and for people with limited mobility. Three of the museums had sub-headings listing information or 
programs specifically for „Individuals with Dementia‟, and one of the five museums had programs listed for 
„Individuals with Developmental or Learning Disabilities.‟ 

International Journal of Business Management and Commerce                                        Vol. 2 No. 4; August 2017 
7 
 
The Museum A website also included a link to the disability access guide in .pdf file format. This guide was 
extensive and included not only general accessibility information but further information about every assessable 
program and event. Museum D provided a fact sheet and accessible map of the museum along with other brief 
accessible information broken down into categories for people who a blind, deaf, who have limited mobility, or 
Alzheimer‟s and dementia. The guide also included brief information about a quarterly E-newsletter.  
 
5. Discussion and Conclusion  
 
The museum industry has become more complex due to changes in society, the demand for understanding visitors 
and their needs, and implementing new technologies. Museums face sizeable competition in the leisure-time 
marketplace and are receiving less funding from governments (Cuccia & Rizzo, 2016). More leisure time 
activities are becoming based on their e-factor, which traditionally has not been a high priority for art museums 
when targeting their audiences. An instant gratification society longs for something far different than what many 
museums currently offer. 
 
For many museums, marketing is a means of survival. Interest in the dynamics of museum marketing is growing, 
and the perception of museum marketing is changing from being an invasive force to that of a useful tool for 
museum promotion (Komarac, 2014). Today, the need for effective marketing is commonly accepted by museum 
directors and staff, although some museum professionals continue to express concerns about the way in which 
marketing or new technologies are tarnishing the traditional missions of museums (Balloffet et al., 2014). 
 
The museums involved in this research certainly are aware of the value of marketing to reach specific disability 
audiences given the variety of specific programs and services that are offered. Examples of this were seen in 
programs specifically for the blind or the deaf or people on the autism spectrum. In addition, these museums are 
beginning to see the value of marketing strategies, such as, brand identity and image, to create and mold the 
identity of the museum as an organization but also to influence how audiences perceive the museum, including 
those with disabilities. 
 
All five participating museums in this research indicated that their missions were to be „accessible museums for 
all people,‟ a statement that was fundamental to their brand identity. Museum staff participating in the research 
confirmed that the goal of the museum was to be a place where all people could feel welcome. They believed that 
their respective museum provided an abundance of accessible programs, tools, and services to support their 
inclusiveness brand image.  
 
New technologies provide a possible benefit, but also some challenges to museums. Some staff noted that 
edutainment is an inevitable trend that museums need to take advantage of in order to get closer to their visitors. 
Word of mouth and the use of technology, such as websites and social media, are the most common forms of 
marketing used to reach to people with disabilities. When implemented broadly to the disability community, 
results suggest that there is increased awareness of museum missions and their goal to become accessible to all. 
Most museums already have websites, email lists, social media, exhibitions, and/or other programs to reach 
people with disabilities. All museums can easily adapt their websites and social media to promote inclusiveness in 
a manner that is clear and relatively easy to find. Staff member from Museum C referenced another museum in 
the same city that had discussed taking accessibility a step further and consulting with web accessible experts to 
create virtual spaces that are user friendly to those who may use screen reader software or need other accessible 
features. Such conversations are healthy among museum circles for staff to learn about new and innovative ways 
to utilize technologies to promote disability access. 
 
Overall, the participating museum websites provided ample information about their accessible offerings and these 
were well organized and generally easy to find. However, Museum B required viewers to click through an 
unnecessarily large number of pages or links to find information about disability access offerings. The researcher 
noted that further improvements could be made to this museums‟ web tools and features to make it more „user-
friendly‟. In general, the participating museum staff  were actively looking for ways to develop their web pages 
and links further to make them even more accessible to people with disabilities.  
 
For example, Museum C‟s staff member described a plan to consult with an accessible technology consultant to 
ensure that in future all images have clear descriptions for screen reader software that members of the blind 
community would use.  
 
 
 

©Center for Contemporary Research                                                                                             www.ijbmcnet.com 
8 
 
This research investigated the specific marketing strategies of five museums across the United States as they 
market to people with disabilities. While this is not an exhaustive investigation of museum marketing, it did, 
however, reveal some of the key tools that museums use to reach people with disabilities. The hope is that the 
data and results presented in this study will assist other museums in learning how they can become more inclusive 
and accessible using practical tools and cost-effective outreach methods. More research, however, is still needed 
in the U.S. on a national scale on the effectiveness of museum word of mouth and digital marketing to know 
whether these are the most effective methods of marketing compared to other traditional forms since this sample 
size is relatively small. Additional research could also assist museums in how they better market their services to 
people with disabilities.  Due to the wide variety of disabilities and museums, there is not a „one size fits all‟ 
approach that will work for all museums. However, further investigation into museum marketing for people with 
disabilities will provide museums with additional data that may assist them in becoming more accessible and 
inclusive to those with disabilities. Finally, future research should include the insights and recommendations of 
people with disabilities to understand what forms of marketing are most beneficial and create an overall sense of 
inclusiveness for everyone. 
 
References  
 
Aaker, D.A., (1996). Building Strong Brands, New York: Free Press.  
Addis, M. (2005). New Technologies and Cultural Consumption – Edutainment is born!, European Journal of 
Marketing, 39 (7), 729-736.  
Americans with Disabilities Act (1990), United States Code. Retrieved from 
http://www.ada.gov/pubs/adastatute08.htm  
Balloffet, P. Courvoisier, F.H., & Lagier, J. (2014). From Museum to Amusement Park: The Opportunities and 
Risks of Edutainment. International Journal of Arts Management, 16 (2), 4-18.  
Caldwell, N., (2000). The Emergence of Museum Brands, International Journal of Arts Management, 2 (3), 28-34.  
Carrozzino, M., & Bergamasco, M. (2010) Beyond virtual museums: experiencing immersive virtual reality in 
real museums. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 11 (4), 452-458. 
Colbert, F., & Courchesne, A., (2012). Critical issues in the marketing of cultural goods: The decisive influence 
of cultural transmission, City, Culture and Society, 3, 275-280.  
Constantine, W. (2007). Museums and the “digital curb-cut”: Leveraging universal design principles and 
multimedia technology to deliver accessible, rich-media learning experiences online, (Master‟s Thesis, 
Harvard University). Retrieved from 
http://www.museotech.com/download/wconstantine_digital_curb_cut.pdf  
Conway, T., & Leighton, D. (2012). Staging the past, enacting the present: Experiential marketing in the 
performing arts and heritage sectors. Arts Marketing: An International Journal, 2 (1), 35-51.  
Cuccia, T., & Rizzo, I. (2016). Less Might be Better: Sustainable funding Strategies for Cultural Producers. City, 
Culture and Society, 7 (2), 109-116. 
Disability Discrimination Act (1992). Retrieved from 
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/dda1992264/  
Freedman, G., (2000). The Changing Nature of Museums, Curator, 43 (4), 295-306.  
Gale, B., (1994). The Importance of Market-Perceived Quality, Brand Power, P. Stobart, ed. New York: New 
York University Press, 65-84.  
ICOM (2014). http://archives.icom.museum/hist_def_eng.html  
Kawashima, N. (1999). Knowing the Public: A Review of Museum Marketing Literature and Research. Museum 
Management and Curatorship, 17 (1), 21-39.  
Kesner, L., (2006). The Role of Cognitive Competence in the Art Museum Experience, in Museum Management 
and Curatorship, 1-16.  
Komarac, T., (2014) A New World for Museum Marketing? Facing the Old Dilemmas While Challenging New 
Market Opportunities, Trziste, 26, 2,199-214.  
Kotler, N.G., Kotler, P., & Kotler, W.I. (2008). Museum Marketing and Strategy, (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.  
 

International Journal of Business Management and Commerce                                        Vol. 2 No. 4; August 2017 
9 
 
Mauriès, P., (2002). Cabinet of Curiosities, London, Thames & Hudson.  
McCall, K., (2002). The REAL Difference Between Marketing and Advertising, Marketing Profs, June 25. 
Retrieved from: http://www.marketingprofs.com/2/mccall5.asp  
McNichol, T. (2005). Creative Marketing Strategies in Small Museums: Up Close and Innovative, International 
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Marketing, 10, 239-247.  
Mencarelli, R., Marteaux, S., & Pulh, M. (2010). Museums, consumers, and on-site experiences. Marketing 
Intelligence & Planning, 28 (13), 330-348.  
Museums and Libraries Archives, (2004), Access for All Toolkit: Enabling Inclusion for Museums, Libraries and 
Archives, Museums and Libraries Archives, Retrieved from: 
https://www.swfed.org.uk/images/resources/Users__Visitors/access/cultural_diversity_checklist.pdf  
Nechita, F., (2014) The New Concepts Shaping the Marketing Communication Strategies of Museums, Bulletin 
of the Transylvania University of Brasov, VII, Vol. 7 (56) No. 1.  
Pine, B.J., & Gilmore, J.H. (1999.). The Experience Economy: Work is Theatre and Every Business is a Stage. 
Boston, MA: HBS Press.  
Pusa, S., & Uusitalo, L., (2014), Creating Brand Identity in Art Museums: A Case Study, International Journal of 
Arts Management, Vol. 17, No. 1, Fall 2014, 18-30.  
Salmen, J. (1998). Everyone‟s Welcome: The Americans with disability act and museums, Washington DC: 
American Association of Museums.  
Scott, C., (2000) Branding: Positioning Museums in the 21st Century, International Journal of Arts Management, 
Vol. 2, No. 3, Spring, 35-39.  
Rentschler, R., & Hede, A. M. (2007). Museum Marketing: Competing in the Global Marketplace. Oxford: 
Butterworth Heinemann.  
Sandell, R., Dodd, J., & Garland-Thomson, R. (2010). Re-presenting disability. Milton Park: Routledge.  
Styliani, S., Fotis, L., Kostas, K., & Petros, P. (2009). Virtual Museums, a survey and some issues for 
consideration. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 10 (4), 520-528.  
Taheri, B., O‟Gorman, K., & Baxter, I. (2016). Contemporary Issues in Museums and Heritage Marketing 
Management: Introduction to the Special Issue, Journal of Marketing Management, 32:15-16, 1387-1391.  
The Economist, (2014). Michaelangelo vs. Mickey Mouse: The Most Popular Museums in the World, The 
Economist, Retrieved from: http://www.economist.com/blogs/gulliver/2014/06/dailychart  
Yeh, J.T., & Lin, C.L. (2005). Museum Marketing and Strategy: Directors‟ Perceptions and Belief. The Journal of 
American Academy of Business, Cambridge, 6 (2), 279-284.  
 

