13
Discussing museum learning  
opportunities for children  
with disabilities
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou1,  
Irida Ntalla2 and Vicky Woollard2
1University of Athens, Greece
2City University London, UK
Introduction 
The recent years, museological literature has began to analyze policies and practices 
that the museum offers to groups with disabilities including children, adding to the value 
of “new” and “potential” audience inclusion. As public institutions, the relationship 
between museums and social agency has become increasingly explored in recent decades 
and museums and galleries are seen as having the potential to “contribute towards the 
combating of social inequality and (have) a responsibility to do so (Sandell, 2002). 
Education, Family and Child & Adolescent Health
Editors: Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou & Bruce David Kirkcaldy, pp. 277-292

278
Additionally, the museum themselves claim impact on bringing people close to 
experience and perspectives that can change their lives. The involvement in history, arts 
and culture is seen to have the potential to boost a person’s self-confidence and self-esteem, 
improve one’s quality of life, build more cohesive communities, and promote learning, all 
of which are aimed at assisting socially excluded individuals in achieving greater chance 
of employment, educational attainment, social networks, and life enjoyment (DCMS, 
2005). According to literature, museums are not the only mechanisms for enculturation 
(Coffee, 2008). They share narratives, history and knowledge which are not separated 
or cannot be separated from the learning experiences that emerge from new roles and 
new ways of working in tackling issues of social exclusion. 
The goal of this chapter is to analyze the concept of museum and its implications 
for developing an inclusive space for children with disabilities, specifically special 
educational needs. It also explores current museum practice in engaging with 
these audiences and it discusses to what extent are these individuals enabled to 
commune with the muses, through handling objects, viewing exhibitions, taking part 
in activities all under the auspices of the museum. The first part seek to stimulate 
the concept of museum as inspiration and cultural process with the possibility of 
opening and creating new models of experience, orienting people toward continuous 
becoming rather than simply being. 
Following, the second part seeks to analyze how museum can operate as 
an interactive learning space. The museum learning is a broad area, constantly 
developing further than just contributing to inspiration and motivation, but offering 
knowledge and skills with an aim to include wider learning opportunities to a wider 
range of audiences. The last section showcases some of the best practices that 
museums in UK display and develop for children with disabilities. 
Many professionals in museums are now addressing social inclusion, exploring 
ways for museums to ‘engage with and impact upon social inequality, disadvantage 
and discrimination’ (Sandell, 2007: 96). The topic bring value to educational 
and health professionals, as it provides awareness and it discusses best practices 
which are being designed and implemented by museums for children who find 
learning difficult due to special needs being at risk of social exclusion. In UK, some 
museum institutions have being active towards shared professional and institutional 
responsibilities in order to respond to local community need (Bellamy, Burghes 
& Oppenheim, 2009). The recognition of social responsibility and the potential 
expressed above can contribute to positive possibilities and opportunities. 
 Museum and new museology
Over the past 15 years museums in the UK have gone through a process of 
change, physically and philosophically. This process can be demonstrated by looking 
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

279
at two definitions of museums drawn up by the Museums Association (The UK’s 
professional body for museums staff) before and after 1999: Prior to 1998 a museum 
‘…is an institution that collects, documents, exhibits and interprets material evidence 
and associated information for the public benefit.’ Post 1998 ‘Museums enable 
people to explore collections for inspiration, learning and enjoyment. They are 
institutions that collect, safeguard and make accessible artefacts and specimens 
which they hold in trust for society.’ (Museums Association 1998 in Lang, Reeve 
& Woollard, 2009: p.33).
The first is descriptive of its professional activities, the importance of the staff 
and the collections while the second places emphasis on the purpose of museums: 
recognizing the importance of the visitor and the significance of their own experiences 
by being inspired through learning and enjoyment. The words ‘make accessible’ 
and ‘learning’ show a form of active collaboration between the visitors who feel 
empowered to construct their own meaning making.
Indeed this second definition reflects back to the Greek origins of the word 
museum, mouseion7, which was the temple of the nine Muses that generated the 
creation of literature and the arts (Hein, 2000). The nine muses, born to Zeus and 
Mnemosyne, the goddess of memory, each had the responsibility to protect one of 
the following: music, poetry, dance, tragedy, comedy, mimic art, song, history and 
astronomy. The Muses’ real potency was to alive the spirit and to enable the individual 
to dedicate themselves to matters that s/he admired and loved. To participate and 
create their own meanings, Socrates guided the young Phaedrus to a higher sense of 
the Muses, the true knowledge about love (Nicholson, 1999). The event is described 
by Plato in the dialogue Phaedrus, who is a young man full of enthusiasm, passion 
and curiosity. Telling the myth of cicadas, singing lusting one summer day outside 
the walls of Athens, Socrates introduce Phaedrus into the nature and the power of 
Muses, the true love, the secret of teaching and learning (Simpson, 1998). 
A shrine of the Muses was the museum of Alexandria, a prominent feature of the 
city itself, included a crucial component, the library (Erskine, 1995). A library in its 
organic terms was in constant flux, having the role to sustain the work of the members 
of the museum and to absorb new thought as it unfolded. It is frequently referred as 
university, because for 200 years it was the most important centre of learning in the 
western world (Meskens, 2010). It was a sacred space of knowing by its special relation 
to the Muses, who collectively inspired the human mind, spirit or soul to dance, sign, 
speak or compose work of myth or reasons. Alexander housed his museum within 
a city, belonging to the city, which in turn belonged to the world. We can say that it 
was the expression of cultural policy in the true sense of the world (El-Abbadi, 2004). 
However the Muses and their inspiration on the concept of mouseion or museum 
(Latin) fell into obscurity, as the museum turned into a showcase of what would  
7 The word itself comes from mousa (αι μουσαι, hai moũsai), his root from the Indo-European men-, which 
is also the source of Greek Mnemosyne, English “mind”, “mental” and “memory” and Sanskrit “mantra” 
(Wikipedia, 2010).	
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

280
appear to be miscellaneous objects but which enthralled the collector. Increased 
trade routes, the discovery of new lands and peoples, released the potent element of 
enquiry and the ‘cabinet of curiosities’ emerged after the fifteenth century with the 
opportunity to embrace and comprehend mysterious objects which challenged the 
accepted view of the world. These collections through careful study and with the 
Enlightenment zeal for classification formed the public museums of the nineteenth 
century which became spaces where the world was ordered, realized and interpreted 
(Hein, 2000). Or as Foucault described these institutions as examples of heterotopias, 
where the accumulation of time through empires, epochs pile high and although 
they ‘archive’ time they are themselves timeless as they survive the ravages of time 
(Foucault, 1967).
Authors such as Neurath (1933), Vergo (1989), Van Mensch(1992) and others 
have put forward a ‚new museology‘ bringing to the fore the museum’s social, 
cultural and educational processes that involve the visitors. These processes require 
space and time, where the visitor meets and interacts with ideas and concepts 
encapsulated by the objects. Otto Neurath in his article ‘Museums of the Future’, 
reprinted at 1991, describes that the museum has a ‘twofold task: to show processes 
and to bring the facts of life into some recognisable relation with social processes’ 
(Neurath, 1933: 220). Further, the museum is confronting the reflection of place and 
territory, both geographically and culturally which initiates a new type of museum 
that was described as a “cultural process” (De Varine, 1996). 
Museum as cultural interactive learning space
To understand museum as a “cultural process” helps us Foucault’s (1986) 
definition of the museum as heterotopia that enables us to define it in terms of a 
philosophical and educational aspect that is part of the museum’s essence. What 
makes the museum a heterotopia is a unity of the spatial and temporal aspects that 
represent a heterotopia of many spaces combined in one. The present totality of 
time and its isolation promise a temporally return to a past way of knowing and 
living that does not exist independently of our existence or our ways of knowing. In 
this sense, museum is a space that alters orders by combining many spaces in one 
site and by sharing relationships with all these spaces, though they are isolated in 
some way (Topinka, 2010). The focus here shifts from the importance on artefacts 
and collections towards the spaces or topos, which are not only representative of 
the culture; they suspect, neutralize or invert the set of relations that they represent 
(Foucault, 1986), orienting and reorienting visitors to see social reality anew. The 
important point is not the space itself but what it performs in relation to other sites, a 
fluid sense of social space and the processes which space is subject, sites of potential 
instability and progress (Thacker, 2003).
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

281
The investigation of heterotopias helps enrich the perception of museum as a 
cultural interactive space (Davis, 2004. Jenkins, 2006. Martin, McKay, Hawkins 
& Murthy, 2007), or as a “rhizomatic” system (Deleuze & Guattari (1987). The 
concept of ‘rhizome’ (Deleuze & Guattari (1987) helps us to reinterpret the museum 
as dynamic, heterogeneous space that encapsulate alternative forms of the world, 
physical, symbolic, real or fictional (Hein, 2000). Museum objects have “multiple 
lives” (Hein, 2000: 51) that project the abstract or unconscious aspect of real world; 
they are embedded in social relations and function as sources of information about 
organized human behaviour. The multiplicity of museum worlds provides clues for 
thinking about the changes in museum and the ways in which the focus is on museum 
as process, with the possibility of opening and creating new models of experience, 
related to continuous becoming rather than simply being. The concept of becoming 
is a system of relations that create possible spaces that have the capacity to affect 
and be affected, which can occur by means of affect (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987). 
The return to affect, to the love of the Muses according to Socrates (Nicholson, 
1999), is seen as means to make museums more dialogic and polysemic and the new 
museology a practice of becoming. While museums are aware of their collections 
and exhibits as objects, the Muses emerge when they intersect in becoming, by 
shifting from object to experience (Hein, 2000). 
Furthermore, Falk and Dierking (1992) introduced the ‘interactive experience 
model’ where they conceive museum participation as an interaction of three main 
settings: the personal, social and physical. A learning experience depends upon 
engagement, mental and physical participation and social activity. For Falk and 
Dierking (2004) children’s learning in a museum is a personal activity, but it cannot 
be understood and produced without the objects and the social context in which 
the engagement takes place. The personal context is made up of each individual’s 
interests, prior experiences and personal memory, whereas the social context 
recognises the importance of the group, with whom one shares one’s experiences, 
checking against others’ understanding and rationales. Lastly the physical context 
refers to the interaction with the tactile and visual environment of the museum 
space. These three contexts are framed by the dimension of time, for learning to be 
acquired, be tested and refined, takes time. 
Proponents of museum learning refer to it as providing a range of positive 
learning experiences and outcomes (Rickinson, Dillon, Teamey et al., 2004). This 
model of learning is seen to impact upon young peoples’ attitudes, beliefs and 
self-perceptions. It is believed that it supports the enhancement of independence, 
confidence, self-esteem, locus of control, self-efficacy, personal effectiveness, and 
coping strategies, interpersonal and social skills – such as social effectiveness, 
communication skills, group cohesion and teamwork (Rickinson et al., 2004).
Along with the reinforcement of the museum as ‘educational’ space, an important 
element to be considered is the difference of learning in museum from learning in 
school which can be understood in terms of formal systems of qualification and 
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

282
measurement (Hooper-Greenhill, 2006). In order to provide a successful learning 
environment, the main focal point for the museum experts will be the active 
engagement of the learners to enrich their individual interpretation of meanings 
and understandings. The education and learning process cannot be perceived as 
an inactive appreciation of facts, information and knowledge rather as a meaning-
making experience, through acting, doing and performing resulting in a powerful 
form of becoming by the learner-participants. 
In contrast to being in school, a visit to museum is considered to offer contextual 
learning in an informal social space (Falk, 2004; Falk & Dierking, 2002). The 
contextual learning includes authentic material culture for shaping the present 
and determining the future through the transformation of the past. Thus, museums 
exist as a time space between two absences - the past and the future presenting a 
choreographic machine for transformation of the past into the future (Preziosi & 
Farago, 2004). The learning in museum settings can take into account the complex 
way in which children construct meaning and learn about the world. The school 
is associated with learning and teaching that is perceived as something that can be 
measured and assessed through a curriculum that regulates activities and teaching 
and learning goals.
 Additionally, the museum education apparent from a vital alternative way 
of learning and complement the formal learning is also a space of excitement, 
wonder, inspiration and creativity that increases the awareness of the world and 
our place in it (Bellamy, Burghes & Oppenheim, 2009). Foucault (1986) dreamed 
of a new age of curiosity. He indicated that “we have the technical means for it; 
the desire is there; the things to be known are infinite; the people who can employ 
themselves at this task exist. Why do we suffer? From too little: from channels 
that are too narrow, skimpy, quasi-monopolistic, insufficient. There is no point 
in adopting the protectionist attitude, to prevent ‘bad’ information from invading 
and suffocating the ‘good’. Rather, we must multiply the paths and the possibility 
of coming and going (p. 198-189). This concept implies a different construction 
of knowledge in the museum, the challenge and rejection of linear narratives, 
historicist arrangement. 
The learning in museum settings can take into account the complex way in 
which children construct meaning and learn about the world. Young children create 
spaces for themselves in the home, under the dinner table or in their bedroom. 
These spaces are for play, imagination, creation, resistance or the actualization of 
the imagination. But these spaces are related to the home, thus according to Hjorth 
(2005) excludes them from becoming a heterotopia. The space within the home is 
not the “space that is other” nor “the space of illusion” (Foucault 1986). Although 
many formal education specialists view creativity and imagination as important 
aspects of learning, they do not leave room for creative activities (Harris, 1999). 
Children’s creative experience in museum can help them moving from relatively 
simple to more complex levels of understanding, thinking and imagination. 
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

283
Children with disabilities and the opportunities in the museum: 
An overview in UK museum institutions 
Hein (2000: 106) refers to museum as an “institution with a moral function” that 
has at the centre of its mission education and public service. The modern museum 
is a vehicle for empowerment of equality by eliminating barriers of disadvantage 
through working with specific groups and communities (Sandell, 2002). Through 
the process of experiences this inclusive museum has the potential to offer spaces of 
‘becoming’ for disadvantaged and marginalized individuals with positive outcomes, 
in their personal, psychological, emotional and social life (Sandell, 2003). However 
such involvement demands the museum to take responsibility to commit to a longer 
term relationships to ensure sustainability.
New museology, its theories and practices has been influenced by politician, 
economical and social factors, particularly within the area of disability, in terms of 
access, inclusion and representation. In the United Kingdom, pressures from groups 
of disabled people resulted in the Disability Discrimination Act (1995) which had as 
its main thesis the social model of disability which insists that “Disability describes 
how society responds to people with impairments; it is not a description of a personal 
characteristic.” (Miller, Parker & Gillinson, 2004). The basis for what has become 
the social model of disability was a document produced in the US in 1976 by The 
Union of Physically Impaired Against Segregation (UPIAS) entitled Fundamental 
Principles of Disability.
‘In our view, it is society which disables physically impaired people. Disability 
is something imposed on top of our impairments, by the way we are unnecessarily 
isolated and excluded from full participation in society’ (UPIAS, 1976:3)
The individual therefore is disabled by the barriers and prejudices of society 
rather than their physical or mental impairment. Thus the social inclusion agenda 
of New Labour government was to ‘tear ‘down these barriers and ensure there is 
equality of opportunity in participation and engagement by these groups (DCMS, 
2005) which included the promotion of multiculturalism and tackling disaffection 
amongst young people (Allday, 2009). The Museums, Libraries and Archives 
Council (MLA) in UK has created a series of guides to disability, which following 
the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA, 1995), that provides a range of information 
including guidelines, toolkits and important information for the museum, libraries 
and archives staff. For most museums the main challenge has been diminishing 
physical barriers to the collections by providing ramps, lifts, Braille labels and 
signed tours for those with hearing difficulties. 
Although these are very important and a visible signal that museums are responding 
to the legislation and to their visitors, other more implicit changes have to be made 
such as disability policies that are museum wide, developing strategic partnerships 
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

284
with other organizations, implications for the training of staff, the roles of the website, 
the collections and the possible negative or positive portrait of people with disabilities 
within them. Nevertheless, there is still space for development on the engagement of 
disabled people. This also derives from the fact that most museum institutions do not 
associate appropriately the field of social inclusion to disability and impairment even 
though people with intellectual impairment are amongst the most socially excluded 
and vulnerable groups in Britain today (Department of Health, 2001: 21).
Even though the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) is acknowledged and has 
moved the apprehension forward, there are still ‘natural’ and ‘common sense’ actions 
and beliefs regarding disability that can be challenged by museums. There are various 
ways in which museums are seeking to address problems of social exclusion of 
disable people, with accessibility, interventions and representation. It has been an 
increasing effort from the museums in UK to improve the accessibility matter within 
the museum space with disability schemes and policies in place, access services which 
include AV technologies and interpretation units as well as building partnerships with 
organizations specialized on the field. The following examples demonstrate different 
ways museums in the UK have made provision for those with disabilities, particularly 
through developing educational programmes and spaces for visitors with additional 
needs to create their own becoming (Woollard, 2004). 
The British Museum has for many years worked with visually impaired children 
and adults in both informal and formal educational groups. For example for deaf and 
hard of hearing audiences services include induction loops in the Clore Education 
Centre, portable Induction Loop system for most gallery talks, monthly sign interpreted 
talks as well as sign interpretation for selected high profile events and occasional 
special events. The inclusion of children and young audiences with special needs 
requires the partnership between the museum with a range of agencies (Sandell, 
2003) and disability organizations (British Museum, 2010). From their experience 
of working with partners has shown that preparing for the visit is crucial so that the 
museum and staff can anticipate needs and demands, thus removing constraints and 
hurdles in advance. 
The Museum’s Schools and Young Audiences teams aim to find appropriate projects 
which match the needs of disabled children through collaborating with their teachers. 
Teachers are given the opportunity to discuss particular pupils’ needs before a visit and 
furthermore, the team sends out support notes for all taught sessions to allow teachers 
and support staff to prepare fully for the nature and content of a workshop. The museum 
also works with consultation groups who advocate and promote equality of access for 
disabled people. This process takes place through either face-to-face discussions or 
via email or telephone calls with a number of key disabled individuals, organizations 
and specific disabled user groups (British Museum, 2010). Using the audio descriptive 
website, the Museum highlights its touch tours in the Egyptian Sculpture Gallery or 
touch provision for the Parthenon Gallery. 
The use of the website has great potential. However, the National Library for the 
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

285
Blind (NLB) estimates that less than a third of websites on the net are accessible to 
visually impaired people. This has been taken up by the National Museums Directors’ 
Conference (NMDC), made up of CEOs of the largest museums and collections in 
the UK, who have explored offering virtual access to the collections using screen 
magnification through software or browser settings, audio screen readers, refreshable 
Braille and speech synthesizers for people with visual and hearing impairments. Both 
the National Maritime Museum’s website and the British Museum’s Compass site 
have won a Visionary Design Award from the NLB on the basis of their high level of 
accessibility for all forms of access technology (NMDC, 2010). 
Once in the galleries museums can be an exciting stimulating and learning space for 
children with learning disabilities. Incorporating museum programming for children 
with learning disabilities requires special material to support learning strengths 
of children and to help engage their interest, personal creativity and intellectual 
characteristics (Woollard, 2004). Handling objects owned by Northampton Museum 
are included in sessions with children with special educational needs to create multi-
sensory experiences (Chambers, 2010). An experienced project team in collaboration 
with a local special school developed a box of artifacts directly related to the collections, 
sparking curiosity and imagination for the user. The box resembles an old treasure 
chest and when opened up it reveals a pop-up screen housing a painting and mixture 
of handling objects and low tech interactives for children to use independently and 
as part of the session. Through touching and smelling, stimulating the senses the 
children come in physical contact with new materials and shapes, to help unravel 
their uses and purposes, giving a material context to ideas and ways of living. The 
multi-sensory box is used within the museum but can be hired for a fee by schools 
or other community groups.
The museum recognizes that there are concerns. Firstly, museum staff uses the 
box with a wide range of schools and children, and from the analysis of the sessions 
it was noted that working with special needs children required specific skills and that 
additional training was required. Secondly the contents of the box continually needed to 
be updated to complement the changing exhibitions to maximize the learning potential 
(Information by Museum Educational Officer, Northampton Museum). 
Certain museums have been designed wholly for children, so expertise is more 
likely to be available and spaces more specific to various needs. The social context 
is inevitably more child focused and more relaxed thereby reducing the social and 
cultural barriers of an adult ordered world. The National Children‘s Museum, Eureka 
in Yorkshire, north east England is an excellent interactive place for children. The 
museum is designed for children from birth to 11 years old including their families 
and carers. Due to its nature, play is at the heart of the visitors’ experience with 
physical interaction; both real and imaginary is encouraged in internal and external 
spaces. The children are invited to make new discoveries and achievements in an 
inclusive environment that minimizes cultural differences and with a focus on the 
special educational needs. For example ‚Break to Play‘ is a programme developed 
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

286
for families who have a child with Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD). With the aim 
to provide a safe and welcoming environment the museum is bringing these children 
and their parents, carers and siblings to experience playful sessions together for a 
six week period. Recognizing the difficulties of such a group they are organized into 
smaller groups according to age: five year olds and under and 5 to eight year olds. 
The Museum became aware of the specific needs of these families from research 
carried out by Contact a Family, which showed that a large number of parents were 
apprehensive about taking their disabled children on days out because of the challenges 
and difficulties they face (Break to Play, Project Evaluation, March 2011). The museum 
therefore aimed to provide the children a space where they felt they belonged and could 
explore the world on their own terms and pace, leading them to a positive experience, 
which in turn gave emotional support to the parents and carers. Art activities and 
small games were developed to exercise the children‘s fine motor coordination skills 
while other games were introduced to encourage negotiating and team skills. The 
programme also offered a valid opportunity for the parents/carers to understand playful 
techniques, confidence on ASD condition as well as reduce the feeling of isolation. 
The staff of the museum got a professional understanding on ASD and disability in 
general, challenging misconceptions and behaviors which automatically gives the 
museum a further elements of accessibility.
Evaluation indicated positive outcomes on the lives of the children and their 
families. For example, the progress of those children who participated in at least one 
activity each week went beyond their parents’ expectation. They improved their motor 
skills, grew in confidence and self esteem, developed in key social and life skills, such 
as turn-taking, sharing and negotiating with others. The majority of parents reported 
that they were happy with the activities of museum, and that their own knowledge and 
confidence in supporting ASD has increased through participation in the activities. 
Concretely, some of the families expressed:
“Meeting the other families and hearing of their experience with ASD has been 
hugely useful to us as a family. It was very useful that the sessions were as structured 
or as unstructured as required. On some weeks, our son simply wanted to use the 
opportunity to run – and we could allow him to do that safely. On other weeks, he 
was happy to be directed to play with specific items and we enjoyed allowing him the 
freedom to dictate what he wanted to do.”
“We learnt that we were able to participate in a group activity; actively involving 
our son and that we could do that very enjoyably as a family. This was an entirely 
new experience for us as previously we would often either not include our son or we 
would have to do things separately. We really enjoyed doing something collectively 
as a family and I think Eureka was the perfect place for this project” (Break to Play, 
Project Evaluation, March 2011).
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

287
The museum is about to commence a three year programme working with 
families with children with disabilities across Yorkshire and beyond. A part of the 
programme is to launch an ambassador scheme with a team of advocates made up of 
children with disabilities, parents and carers who will provide advice to the museum 
on suggestions for new developments and programmes, as well as highlighting 
individual needs. Special Educational Needs (SENs) learning is an area that the 
museum have included in its regular educational programme and which has increased 
over the last few years. The museum has a strong partnership with Horizon School, 
a special secondary school in Dalston, Hackney, and through working with the staff 
and pupils the museum staff have sharpened their awareness and skills. Projects 
such as ‘My Home My Self’ using photography is a part of an annual project ‘Inside 
out’ for pupils with severe learning difficulties has become apart of the school’s 
curriculum. This photography project explores ideas around identity and domestic 
space and looks at how objects contain meaning and references. 
Apart from these school projects the museum has organized two successful 
forums and is encouraging independent visits with friends, carers or families. The 
museum evaluates its work across all its activities including those with SENs. On 
the whole teachers complete the questionnaires as to what extent were the aims and 
outcomes of the sessions were successful. However the museum is endeavoring to 
included pupils comments by devising ‘specific’ visual represented questionnaires 
for them to complete, especially the older pupils. These sheets have also been used 
to evaluate older pupils with disabilities’ experiences of a work placement at the 
museum, working with office staff behind the scenes.
Special needs are one of the main focus areas of Geffrye museum the last years. 
The museum works extensively with individuals with moderate to severe learning 
difficulties as well as with pupils with emotional and behavioral problems. The 
Education Officer expressed the importance of training for the museum staff and 
both permanent and freelancer staff have regular training on working with individuals 
and children with a range of needs providing them with confidence in working in 
specialized areas. The museum is keen to mainstream groups with SENs so they 
feel fully included and integrated with other groups as part of their school visits or 
in the activities provided in the holidays and weekends. However there are problems 
relating to space and accessibility which the museum is trying to overcome. Thus such 
inclusion requires careful, long term planning of projects and efficient communication 
between museum practitioners and other partners in order for the museum to offer the 
best learning environment and experiences for the children.
These examples give some understanding on the types of ‘good practice’ that 
include children and young people with disabilities and other social needs in the 
museum activities and projects. The importance of these programmes is that the 
museums are raising awareness within and beyond the institution on issues around the 
definitions of physical and learning disabilities, impairment and representation. The 
awareness and understanding of museums’ staff on such issues by working closely 
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

288
with teachers, practitioners, agencies and organisations is vital for the development 
of substantial museum spaces.
Dedicated museum spaces for children with special needs can incorporate a range 
of cultural artefacts, multi-sensory resources such as photographs, undertaking tours 
with 3D maps, using audio guides and video-recording to create individual and 
authentic connections to the collections. Such spaces require strategic planning to 
allow for flexible and innovative exhibits and programs so that the learning and 
teaching experiences develops each child’s specific abilities. A group of museums, 
including the NMDC group and the Geffrye, together with the existing literature 
suggest the following main points that are central to using museum as an inclusive 
agent for children with special needs.
The first one demonstrates the critical role that partnerships play between the 
museum and the education sector. Museums have much to learn from the world 
of teachers and carers about creating an inclusive space for children with special 
needs to bring about beneficial change. Museum practitioners have demonstrated the 
importance of learning “specific” techniques, gaining professional understanding and 
confidence with the notion of disability, challenging misconceptions through their 
collaboration with teachers and organizations working with these groups. Thus what 
makes an effective partnership is the training of the museum staff which embeds beliefs 
and ambitions into reality by widening access to the collections and broadening the 
museums’ audiences. Staff not only can use their expertise working with formal school 
group visits but they can also be confident to support individual visits by families with 
children with disabilities and young people with special needs.
In creating a dedicated space for children with disabilities, their families and 
teachers demands planning and resources. Appropriate exhibits and programmes can 
create multiple opportunities for children with special needs if they are supported by 
special materials and new supportive technologies such as tactile images and Braille, 
large print information, audio screen readers, speech synthesizers, website special 
elements. In order for the museum to connect children with their offline and online 
spaces, it needs to create suitable environments that facilitate their requirements on 
a regular basis. 
Furthermore, these spaces should be integrated within the general structures and 
programmes of the museum helping children with special needs to be included with 
their peers, though having different interests, abilities and skills, can still explore and 
experience the same exhibits together avoiding apparent exclusion. Through inclusion 
comes the possibility of empowerment, contributing to the museum’s ‘knowledge’ 
and engaging with decision making, such as advisory groups enabling disabled people 
to play an active role in designing projects and learning experiences. As we already 
have mentioned before, the museum’s democratization is its obligation to constantly 
renew its patterns of thought and practices. 
Lastly, museums recognize the value of evaluation, and the projects‘ outcomes, 
apprehending it in theory and policies but under development. The museum is engaged 
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

289
with the evaluation processes, using questionnaires, surveys and commentary books 
but it is mainly focused on getting out specific messages or outcomes for certain 
exhibitions. The evaluation of specific programmes on a systematic basis of specific 
outcomes can support the effective understanding of visitors requirements and needs. 
Additionally, this can provide a framework to apprehend a diverse audience including 
children with special educational needs and disabilities as well as measuring the social 
impact of the inclusive museum. 
Conclusion
The Deuleuzian rhizomatic model is an initial move to a museum space as a 
social process able to construct our culture and society allowing audiences ‘return’ 
to a multiplicity of knowledge experiences in a heterotopia of becoming. The 
contribution of some museums to make places of becoming for vulnerable children 
offers to a greater understanding. The emphasis lies on the interrelations towards 
the space or topos, more precisely on their interrelations. The important point is 
not the space itself but what it performs in relation to other sites, a fluid sense of 
social space and the processes which space is subject, sites of potential instability 
and progress (Thacker, 2003). The concept of becoming is a system of relations 
that create possible spaces that have the capacity to affect and be affected which 
can occur by means of affect (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987).
The physical and educational participation and accessibility of people and 
especially children with special educational needs is a vital component for an 
inclusive museum as a space or topos of becoming. British Museum develops 
educational programmes which match the needs of disabled children in collaboration 
with teachers. The National Maritime Museum plays a significant role on accessibility 
to the collections for people with visual and hearing impairments. The National 
Children‘s Museum, Eureka is an excellent interactive place for children with 
Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Geffrye Museum, in east London works with 
children with learning disabilities, creating a space of discovery and stimulation of 
audience‘s imagination. 
The museum’s role as an educational space of becoming includes its constant 
aim to tackle exclusion and reach broader audience. The children and young 
people with special needs are the most socially excluded and vulnerable groups 
in UK (Department of Health, 2001: 21). Museums can become for this group 
spaces with benefits in their personal development and in their health and well 
being. The awareness, the up-to-date knowledge, the training of museum experts 
on their specific needs, the collaboration with the school, parents and health 
professionals as well as the systematic and continuous evaluation and the creation 
of inclusive interactive spaces will support the implementation of best practices and 
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

290
a breakthrough on excluding children with special needs, dominating stereotypes 
and notions of disability. 
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all the museum professionals who supported the 
completion of this chapter with their valuable input. A special thanks to the Janice 
Welch, the Education officer for Schools and Formal Learning at Geffrey Museum, 
Natalie Chambers and Elizabeth Long from Northampton Museum and Art Gallery and 
museum staff the Eureka! museum for their time and discussions on the subject area. 
References
Allday, K. (2009). From changeling to citizen: Learning disability and its representation in 
museums. Museum and Society, 7(1), 32-49. 
Bellamy, K., Burghes, L., & Oppenheim, C. (2009). Learning to live. Museums, young people 
and education. In K. Bellamy & C. Oppenheim (Eds.) Learning to live. Museums, young 
people and education (pp. 9-21). Institute for Public Policy Research and National Museum 
Directors’ Conference. 
British Museum. (2010). Disability equality scheme. http://www.britishmuseum.org/PDF/
disability_equality_scheme.pdf	
Chambers, N. (2010). A case study: “In the picture” Creation of a sensory loans box for pupils 
with special needs http://www.learningmatters2u.co.uk/Case_Studies_files/In%20the%20
Picture%20Sensory%20Loans%20Box.pdf.
Coffee, K. (2008). Cultural inclusion, exclusion and the formative roles of museums. Museum 
Management and Curatorship, 23(3), 261-279. 
Davis, P. (2004). Ecomuseums and the democratisation of Japanese museology. International 
Journal of Heritage Studies, 10(1), 93-110.
DCMS. (2005). Understanding the future: Museums and 21st century life. London: DCMS.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia (B. 
Massumi, Trans.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. (Original work published 
1980).
Department of Health (2001). Valuing people a new strategy for learning disability for the 
21st century. London: HMSO.
De Varine, H. (1996). Ecomuseum or community museum? 25 years of Applied research in 
museology and development, http://www.asdic.fr/francais/ecomu.htm. 
Disability Discrimination Act (1995). London: HMSO. http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/
disabilitydiscriminationact1995.pdf.
El-Abbadi, M. (2004). The Alexandria Library in history. In A. Hirst & M. Silk (Eds.), 
Alexandria, real and imagined (pp. 167-183). Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.
Erskine, A. (1995). Culture and power in Ptolemaic Egypt: The museum and library of 
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

291
Alexandria. Greece and Rome, 1, 38-48.
Falk, J. (2004). The director’s cut: Toward an improved understanding of learning from 
museums. Science Education, 88(Supplement 1), 82-96.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (1992). The museum experience. Whalesback Books, Washington, 
DC. 
Falk, J., & Dierking, L. D. (2002). Lessons without limit: How free-choice learning is 
transforming education. Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press.
Falk, J., & Dierking, L. D. (2004). The contextual model of learning. In G. Anderson (Ed.), 
Reinventing the museum: Historical and contemporary perspectives on the paradigm shift 
(pp. 139-153). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. 
Foucault, M. (1967). Of other spaces. Heterotopias. (Online) http://foucault.info/documents.
hetertopia/foucault.heterotopia.en.html (30/1/11).
Foucault, M. (1986). Of other spaces. Diacritics, 16(1), 22-27. 
Harris, I. (1999). Outdoor education in secondary schools: What future? Horizons, 4, 5-8.
Hein, G. S. (2000). The museum in transition: A philosophical perspective. London: Smithsonian 
Institution Press.
Hjorth, D. (2005). Organizational entrepreneurship with de Certeau on creating heterotopias 
(or spaces for play). Journal of Management Inquiry, 14(4), 386-398. 
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (2006). The power of museum pedagogy. In H. H. Genoways (Ed.), 
Museum’s philosophy for the twenty-first century (pp. 235-247). Oxford: Altamira Press.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York: New 
York University Press.
Lang, C., Reeve, J., & Woollard, V. (Eds.) (2009). The responsive museum: Working with 
audiences in the twenty-first century. Hampshire, England: Ashgate Publishing Co. 
Martin, J., McKay, E., Hawkins, L., & Murthy, V. K. (2007). Design-personae: Matching 
students’ learning profiles in web-based education. In E. McKay (Ed.), Enhancing learning 
through human-computer interaction (pp. 110-131). London: Idea Group Reference.
Miller, P., Parker, S., & Gillinson, S. (2004). Disablism: How to tackle the last prejudice. 
London: Demos. 
Meskens, A. (2010). Travelling mathematics- The fate of Diophantos Arithmetic. A Springer 
Basic Product. 
National Museum Directors’ Conference. (2010). Museums and galleries:Creative engagement. 
A report commissioned by National Museum Directors’ Conference. www.nationalmuseums.
ork.uk
Neurath, O. (1933). Museums of the future. Survey Graphics, 22, 458-63. (Reprinted in Haller 
and Kinross, 1991).
Nicholson, G. (1999). Plato’s Phaedrus: The Philosophy of love. West Lafayette, Indiana: 
Purdue University Press. 
Rickinson, M., Dillon, J., Teamey, K., Morris, M., Choi, M. Y., Sanders, D., et al. (2004). A 
review of research on outdoor learning. London:National Foundation for Educational 
Research and King’s College.
Preziosi, D., & Farago, C. (Eds.) (2004). Grasping the world: the idea of the museum. Aldershot: 
Ashgate.
Sandell, R. (2002). Museums, society, inequality. London: Routledge. 
Sandell, R. (2003). Social Inclusion, the museum and the dynamics of sectoral change. Journal 
of Museums and Society, 1(1), 45-62.
Discussing museum learning opportunities for children with disabilities

292
Sandell, R. (2007). Museums, prejudice and the reframing of difference. London: Routledge.
Simpson, Th. K. (1998). Abode of the modern muse: The science museum. Great ideas today. 
http://www.thomasksimpson.com/abode.pdf
Thacker, A. (2003). Moving through modernity: Space and geography in modernism. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Topinka, R. J. (2010). Foucault, Borges, Heterotopia: Producing knowledge in other spaces. 
Foucault Studies, 9, 54-70. 
UPIAS (1976). Fundamental principles of disability. London: Union of the Physically 
Impaired Against Segregation.
http://www.leeds.ac.uk/disabilitystudies/archiveuk/index.htmlVan Mensch, P. (1996). 
Towards a methodology of museology
http://www.muuseum.ee/en/erialane_areng/museoloogiaalane_ki/p_van_mensch_
towar/
Vergo, P. (1989). The New museology. London: Reaktion Books. 
Wikipedia (2010). Muse, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muse http://www.city.ac.uk/
ictop/mus-def.html
Woollard, V. (2004). Caring for the visitor. In ICOM Running a museum: A practical 
handbook (pp. 105-119). ICOM- International Council of Museums. 
Webpages
Wikipedia. (2010). Muse, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muse http://www.city.
ac.uk/ictop/mus-def.html
Alexander-Stamatios Antoniou, Irida Ntalla and Vicky Woollard

T
his book is an ambitious project uniting various fields in a 
multidisciplinary venture drawing on academics and clinicians from 
medicine, psychology and educational sciences. The interdisciplinary 
approach has assembled medical, educational and health specialists with 
scholarly contributions from many different countries and institutes. 
 
A plethora of scientific studies have shown that in order for children 
to maintain good health, both physically and psychologically, families, 
teachers, physicians and psychologists have to work closely together. 
Few scientific books address the wide spectrum of challenges required to 
resolve such developmental issues: for example, when families migrate 
to unfamiliar countries, the influence of grandparents in childrearing 
practises, impact of having a disabled children on family structures and 
social interactions, socio-economic factors which impose limits on healthy 
growth, and families which have to cope with debilitating emotional crises 
whether originating from the parents or their offspring. This collection of 
essays is an attempt to bridge theoretical and research concepts and findings 
with clinical practise, adopting an interdisciplinary and cross-cultural 
perspective. It reveals determinants and other factors which are implicated 
in the effectiveness of health promotion and therapeutic interventions, as 
well as identifying reliable diagnostic and health programs and / or enhance 
learning and teaching programmes.

