Design for Inclusion, Vol. 75, 2023, 132–144
https://doi.org/10.54941/ahfe1003334
Enhancing Inclusive Experience in
Museums: Results From a Field Study
Alessia Brischetto, Ester Iacono, Claudia Becchimanzi,
and Francesca Tosi
Laboratory of Ergonomics & Design (LED), Architecture Department, University of
Florence, Sandro Pertini 93, 50041, Calenzano, Firenze, Italy
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a part of the project “XAll - Tutta un’altra guida” (XAll - A whole
other guide), funded by the TIM Foundation, which partners the University of Florence,
the Polytechnic University of Milan, and the referents of 3 Florentine museums: Museo
di Palazzo Vecchio, Museo Bardini and Museo Bargello. The overall objective of the
project is to create an interactive, customizable and inclusive visit support, aimed at
the overall population and designed to encourage a multisensory visit experience, rea-
lized by inserting tactile, sound and olfactory stimuli in the visit path of the 3 Museums
involved and enhanced by the use of augmented reality. Speciﬁc objectives of the pro-
ject are: to make cultural heritage accessible to visitors with all types of disability; to
improve the quality of independent visitation in terms of engagement and customiza-
tion of the experience; to encourage the dissemination of free applications in museum
accessibility projects; and to provide an integrated framework and a set of open source
tools for the development of applications in the same area.
Keywords: Human centred design, Inclusive museum, Museum experiences, Inclusive museum
video guides, Multi-sensory stations
INTRODUCTION
Open access to culture and the possibility to experience and learn about art
in museums are human rights that should be granted to everyone. However,
very often, the information accessible to users through the official channels
of museums regarding independent visitation by individuals with a disability
generally refers to accessibility in terms of mobility, and they also frequ-
ently provide incomplete information. Furthermore, information related to
independent enjoyment by people with sensory disabilities (visually impai-
red, blind, hearing impaired, deaf) is most often lacking, as the accessibility
of the visit route is generally guaranteed in a pre-scheduled way and the pre-
sence of mediators. This aspect limits the free enjoyment of the artworks
by people with sensory disabilities. Furthermore, it shows the lack of a real
inclusive culture and adequate tools to guarantee the full right to visit inde-
pendently, in their way and on time. This paper presents a part of the project
“XAll - Tutta un’altra guida” (XAll - A whole other guide), funded by the
TIM Foundation, which partners the University of Florence, the Polytech-
nic University of Milan, and the referents of 3 Florentine museums: Museo
© 2023. Published by AHFE Open Access. All rights reserved.
132

Enhancing Inclusive Experience in Museums
133
di Palazzo Vecchio, Museo Bardini and Museo Bargello. The overall obje-
ctive of the project is to create an interactive, customizable and inclusive visit
support aimed at the overall population and designed to encourage a mul-
tisensory visit experience, realized by inserting tactile, sound and olfactory
stimuli in the visit path of the 3 Museums involved and enhanced by the
use of augmented reality. Specific objectives of the project are: to make cul-
tural heritage accessible to visitors with all types of disability; to improve
the quality of independent visitation in terms of engagement and customiza-
tion of the experience; to encourage the dissemination of free applications in
museum accessibility projects; and to provide an integrated framework and
a set of open source tools for the development of applications in the same
area.
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY OF INTERVENTION
To achieve the overall objective, the project involved the application of the
scientific and methodological approaches of Inclusive Design (Dong et al.,
2012) and Human-Centered Design (ISO 9241-210: 2019). In particular, the
study, developed over several stages, envisaged the involvement of various
types of museum users, using a participatory design approach aimed at the
associations ENS (Italian Association of the Deaf), UICI (Italian Union for
the Blind and Visually Impaired) and HABILIA Onlus (Paratetraplegic and
Motor Disabled Association) and to the various museum institutions invo-
lved in the project. This involvement has made it possible to focus attention
on their needs and expectations and the skills and points of view of the profes-
sionals involved in the planning and managing of the services offered by the
museums. Precisely, the research followed the following operational phases:
Phase 1: Definition of user profiles;
Phase 2: Preliminary studies of User/museum interaction models;
Phase 3: Development of design solutions and intervention scenarios.
Phase 1: Deﬁnition of User Proﬁles
To define user profiles during the preliminary design phase, the following
activities were conducted: (1) On-site investigation of the three museums
involved in the project; (2) Survey visits and field observations (Stanton
et al., 2014), in collaboration with experts from the museum institutions,
at the three Florentine museums and with the 3 associations involved (see
Figure 1); (3) Collection and systematization of feedback and data collected
during the observations (photographic and audio-video material), based on
which it was possible to set up the development of the video guide project
and multi-sensory stations to be included within the museums.
In this phase, the main objective of the research was to collect opinions
and suggestions for the realization of an optimal visit and the information
necessary for the design development of the video guide and the multi-sensory
stations.
In particular, the specific objectives of this phase were: (a) Identify the
visit routes and the works to be tested (which works will be the subject of
tactile reproduction and related sensory stimuli); (b) Define critical issues

134
Brischetto et al.
Figure 1: Sensory explorations (tactile, olfactory, auditory, etc.) of the works of the
three Florentine museums and with the involvement of the associations (ENS, UICI,
HABILIA Onlus).
related to physical and sensory accessibility; (c) Define the preliminary design
requirements of the video guide and multi-sensory stations.
Phase 2: Preliminary Studies of User/Museum Interaction Models
The study of user profiles allowed to conduct early analysis of User-Museum
interaction models through the following activities and methodologies: (1)
literature review and identification of the requirements of mobile media and
multi-sensory stations (graphic presentation methods of the works, supports
used and construction techniques, technologies) (Chick, 2019; Mäkelä, 2020;
Vaz et al., 2020); (2) development of User Journey Maps (Hanington and
Martin, 2019) that would visually allow the narration of users’ actions,
feelings, perceptions within museums (see Figure 2); (3) construction of sce-
narios that represent the current ways of using the works; (4) analysis of the
state of the art and of the sector literature for the definition of the technical
characteristics of the video guide (method of presenting the contents, narra-
tive styles, limits and opportunities of current technologies, etc.) (Moncrief
et al., 2022; Musiolik, 2022; Ahmetovic et al., 2021; Hutchinson and Eard-
ley, 2021). In particular, the User Journey Maps and the usage scenarios
relating to the use of the application and stations by the reference user target,
in addition to providing a holistic view of the user experience, have made it
possible to reveal critical issues and new opportunities to improve the user’s
experience.
Phase 3: Development of Design Solutions and Intervention
Scenarios.
The last phase of the research allowed, based on the critical issues that emer-
ged in the previous phases of analysis, the formulation and development of
new design solutions through (1) the use of Design orienting scenarios (Man-
zini and Jégou, 2004) for the development of visions and innovative proposals
centered on user needs. This tool made it possible to represent the strategic
vision of the research team and favoured (2) brainstorming sessions (Nun-
nally and Farkas, 2016) with the individual associations to verify and record
the results of the previous research phases. Within these sessions, the features

Enhancing Inclusive Experience in Museums
135
Figure 2: User journey map relating to the museum experience (Palazzo Vecchio) of
blind users.
and requirements of the beta version of the Application were presented (video
guide), and the first versions of multi-sensory stations were submitted.
RESULTS
Given the complexity and breadth of the research content, only some of the
most significant findings from the study have been reported in this paper.
Therefore, the results of the main phases described in the previous paragraph
are reported here.
Critical Issues and Design Ideas [Phase 1]
In the phase of collecting and systematizing the feedback and collected data
[Phase 1], it was possible to identify and define the stages of the video/audio
guide and the multi-sensory stations for the three partner museums of the
research project. Specifically, maps have been drawn up showing the itine-
raries for visiting the museums, with the activities to be carried out within
each area envisaged for a visit. At the same time, the user experience with
the application and with the multi-sensory stations and information pan-
els along the route is described. (see Figure 3). As far as the application is
concerned, the map aims to clearly show both the specific accessibility fea-
tures that can be used in the vicinity of a specific work or one of the stages
of the visit and the interaction between the user and the graphical interface
and the flow of activity it can perform. Similarly, as regards the information
panels and multi-sensory stations, the map indicates the interaction meth-
ods envisaged for users and the possible actions for a visit that is not only
accessible but inclusive. Furthermore, in this research phase, it was possible

136
Brischetto et al.
Figure 3: Summary map of the main stages of the video/audio guide and of the multi-
sensory stations for the Palazzo Vecchio museum.
to find helpful information for understanding how the current museum envi-
ronments interface with diversified users (visually impaired, blind, hearing
impaired, deaf, motor disabled), critical issues relating to physical and sen-
sory accessibility, and possible design ideas that can make the museum system
genuinely inclusive.
In particular, the following is a summary of some considerations that
emerged during the observations, correlated by some ideas and design
requirements:
ENS - needs, problems and design ideas:
•
Inability to hear alarms - essential for ENS.
•
Videos in LIS (Italian Sign Language) and international sign language,
with short and simple sentences. Subtitles in Italian and English, taking

Enhancing Inclusive Experience in Museums
137
into account that the deaf does not know Italian well; therefore the need
to structure the texts and their format in an adequate way (in particu-
lar, avoid sentences that are too long and terms that are too complex) is
highlighted.
•
Videos with subtitles and sign language interpreters are essential for the
use of deaf people. Therefore, the collaboration of associations and pro-
fessionals in the sector is essential for developing the video guide. It is
also necessary to study the most suitable editing methods, particularly the
graphic and multimedia structure of the sign language videos and using a
green screen.
•
The association and the interviewees highlighted the need to structure the
videos in sign language, focusing on the following aspects: short videos
(maximum 2 minutes) and simple theses (otherwise, it risks becoming
heavy for users who get distracted and no longer follow the explanations).
•
The visual and textual supports near the works must consider the structure
and complexity of the texts and, above all, the correlation between works
and texts. These aspects are fundamental to include everyone regardless of
the knowledge of sign language and the language skills of each individual.
•
The association suggests using, where possible, QRcode systems that
offer further explanations. For example, through the QR codes, one (or
more) videos in sign language could be activated (Barbosa et al., 2021).
These videos would give users more information on the elements of the
exhibition than the captions, which are already present in museums.
UICI - needs, problems and design ideas:
•
[Blind] Need to have an audio guide with “nice” but not excessively long
(short and concise) audio descriptions; “preliminary” audio that briefly
describes and introduces the museum, its history and the spaces available.
•
[Blind] Tactile stations with reproductions of the main works and possibly
of the museum building to better understand the spaces.
•
Auditory and olfactory stimuli are much appreciated.
•
[Blind] The tactile experience allows you to know aspects that have
never been explored (for example, the specific morphology of some ani-
mals, “tactile experience - Loggia del Verrocchio”). Therefore, you must
also pay attention to similar experiences and knowledge of the world of
classical art (a practical aspect for structuring the audio descriptions).
•
[The visually impaired and colour-blind] Use a colour-blind filter (or
similar systems) for visual enjoyment based on contrast and saturation
adjustment.
•
[The visually impaired and colour-blind] Take care of graphic and visual
aspects, oriented towards customizing screens (for example adjusting font
sizes, image contrast, adjusting RGB channels).
Physically disabled - needs, problems and design ideas:
•
Need to easily find information on parking for the disabled and routes
with public transport to reach the museums independently (optimize the
wayfinding system with maps/routes to avoid critical itineraries).

138
Brischetto et al.
•
Indications visible and placed at a suitable height, especially near the
main entrance (for example: as in the case of museums where the “main”
entrance is not accessible).
•
Indications on the location of toilets and essential services (such as lifts)
and on how to reach them.
•
Insertion of videos or photo sequences of the rooms not accessible for
people with motor disabilities to show at least part of what is contained
inside (for example QR-Code to be scanned with the app).
•
Insert all the previous indications in the app (in particular, the rooms not
accessible for people with motor disabilities), adding feedback that can
allow the user to request assistance from museum staff and warn the lat-
ter about the presence of the disabled person inside of the museum (to
optimize any preparation of ramps or similar solutions).
•
Need for accessible tactile stations.
Features and Prerequisites App [Phase 2]
Starting from systematic research on the state of the art of the main applica-
tions in the museum and cultural fields, phase 2 envisaged a specific focus on
museum applications that include features dedicated to motor, visual, hea-
ring, and cognitive disabilities and applications designed according to the
Inclusive Design approach (Gilbert, 2019; Waller et al. 2015, Kim et al.
2016).
Given the number of applications on the market, depending on the spe-
cific topic of this research, it was necessary to select only the most effective
museum applications in terms of inclusion and accessibility. Therefore, the
research results relating to the selected applications were analysed and rew-
orked in a summary table (see Figure 4), which shows the functions and
accessibility needs the application must satisfy to be considered inclusive.
In particular, mapping the user experience has allowed the detailed defi-
nition of all the itineraries envisaged for visiting the three museums and
the related functions of the application. For each area of the museum, the
following have been identified:
•
front-end features, therefore relating to the user experience and the usa-
bility of the application, or rather its interaction with the application’s
User Interface, with a focus on accessibility and inclusion for the four
macros-categories of disabilities identified;
•
back-end features, i.e., relating to development and programming to
guarantee the optimal execution of the identified functions.
The features foreseen for the development of the application and the front-
end and back-end requirements are briefly described in Table 1.
Features and Prerequisites of Multi-Sensory Stations [Phase 2]
Concerning what emerged from phase 2 of the research, it was possible
to analyse the best methods of graphic presentation of the works, and
the supports used, the construction techniques and the technologies dee-
med more inclusive. Therefore, multi-sensory stations characterised by 3D

Enhancing Inclusive Experience in Museums
139
Figure 4: Accessibility features identiﬁed as necessary for the development of an
inclusive museum application.
and 2D models and technological systems have been hypothesised to sup-
port the tactile, visual, and sensorial dimensions. The first design hypotheses
of the stations were defined in collaboration with the bodies involved based
on the individual routes and the relative stages. The essential requirement of
tactile stations is to satisfy the three ≪senses of touch≫and the act of tactile
perception itself. These “senses” can be summarised as follows: a) the abi-
lity to follow a line, i.e., the sensory recognition capabilities of the fingertip;
b) the haptic ability, i.e., knowing and recognizing the position of the hand in
the space of the tactile device; c) the ability to recognise and differentiate the
roughness of surfaces and therefore the texture. Multi-sensory supports must
therefore be able to match the diversity of end users, from motor disabilities
to sensory, cognitive and mental disabilities. Furthermore, the supports must
embrace the philosophy of Design for All and enhance the use of the works
and the related thematic contents of “historical-cultural heritage”. Therefore,
the main focus concerned the development of tactile support solutions for
blind (and visually impaired) people and integrated by technical and seman-
tic (pedagogical) solutions capable of guaranteeing the interaction of people

140
Brischetto et al.
Table 1. Main features foreseen for the development of the application and front-end
and back-end requirements.
Visual impairments
Hearing
disabilities
Physical
disabilities
Cognitive
disabilities
Front-
end
featu-
res
(Audio channel)
Audio descriptions
Ability to change
screen settings.
For the visually
impaired,
low-resolution
values (e.g.
800x600px make
reading easier),
possibility of
choosing large
fonts, points,
contrast, etc. vary
according to the
level of view.
(Visual channel)
Descriptive video
guide in sign
language (LIS)
Augmented
reality (AR)
(Visual and
audio channel)
Indications on
which areas
are accessible -
entrance/porti-
ons
(rooms/areas)
of the museum
Indicate
parking spaces
and/or services
useful for
reaching the
museum
(Visual
and
audio channel)
Dynamic
font
change,
with
the
addition
of
Easy
Rea-
ding Font for
Specific
Lear-
ning Disorders
(SLD).
Glossary or
possibility to
search for dif-
ficult/complex
words
Back-
end
featu-
res
Screen reader (Talk
Back/ VoiceOver)
Colour filtering for
different types of
colour blindness or
an increase in
contrasts.
Enlargement of
fonts and images
for the visually
impaired.
Voice commands
(Voice Access on
Android, Voice
Control on iOS)
video guide in
sign language
(LIS) with
subtitles
Since people
born deaf do not
understand
written Italian
like those
without the
disability, the
Glossary feature
on Android and
iOS allows them
to understand
more complex
words.
Sound
Recognition
(only available
on iOS).
QR-Code with
video showing
the
inaccessible
area.
Map with
parking spaces
for people
with motor
disabilities,
and routes to
reach the
museum in
safety
(including
public
transport
available)
Information
on which areas
of the museum
are accessible,
and which are
not.
Dynamic
font
change,
with
the
addition
of
Easy
Rea-
ding Font for
Specific
Lear-
ning Disorders
(SLD).
Glossary
feature
on
Android
and
iOS
Possibility of
adapting the
length of the
contents
presented,
between a
“complete”
form and a
“reduced”
form.
with the historical-cultural heritage” in a For All key. Therefore, it was pos-
sible to identify the requirements, characteristics and techniques/instruments
deemed necessary for developing multi-sensory stations (see Table 2).

Enhancing Inclusive Experience in Museums
141
Table 2. Requirements, objectives and technical features/instruments identiﬁed as
necessary for developing multi-sensory stations.
Requirements
Goals
Technical features
“3d scanner” detection
Digital return of
tangible works
“sculptures,
monuments, frescoes,
architectures”.
Laser specification: (1) laser scanner
and/or (2) structured light scanner. In
both cases (1 - 2) they are
≪non-invasive≫scanners, i.e. they do
not provide for the application of
optical references on the surface of the
sculpture: in order to preserve the
integrity of the object itself. The
sensitivity of the device and the
scanning precision must be around
0.3mm.
Digitization and
modelling of the works
Post-production of 3d
scans.
Use of 3D modelling software
(Zbrush, Rhino) for the calibration
and fine-tuning of the detail “touch
thresholds” in terms of volume
dimensions.
3D printing
UV printing or 3D and
2D relief printing,
capable of producing
artefacts made with
materials suitable for
museum contexts “in
particular for frequent
tactile use”.
Characteristics of the materials:
resistance and an aesthetic
pleasantness to the final object made
with materials such as Corian,
Plexiglas, plastic resins such as PLA
(or similar). Minimum precision
threshold (“usable to the touch”)
about 0.6mm.
Laser cutting and
finishing surface
treatments
Colour screen printing, laser printing
Quality tactile support
finishing
Painting or colour
printing of tactile
supports and scaled
3D reproductions.
Colour screen printing, laser printing,
also made on 2D reliefs and
infographics.
Graphic
post-production of the
works and signage
2D (digital) graphic
optimization of the
informative and
narrative details of the
works and orientation
systems
Example: simplification of the
composite system and/or chromatic
restitution for the visually impaired of
the constituent levels of a work
“background - characters etc.”
Integration of
technologies to
multi-sensory stations
Sensory fruition with
augmented reality
Basic lighting technology, connectivity,
basic electronics, RFID and NFC,
recorded audio descriptions integrated
into the stations.
Technical development
of olfactory diffusers –
to integrate the stations
Creation of olfactory
devices and creation of
customized essences in
the laboratory.

142
Brischetto et al.
Realization of Analogue and Digital Study Prototypes [Phase 3]
The last phase of this study involved the development of a preliminary UI
developed with Adobe XD and FIGMA software based on the design requi-
rements identified during the field research and analysis activities (described
in phases 1-2). This version has considered aspects such as the primary display
mode of content and choice of paths, layout and wireframe, and UI intera-
ction styles for user categories. Based on possible technical limitations, such
as connectivity inside historic buildings and the requirement for the replicabi-
lity of the video guide, it was decided to develop an application without any
embedded content but connected to a web server that contains all museum
materials. Before starting the tour, the user must choose which museum to
visit; the application will download all the required material onto the user’s
smartphone to make it available locally. For these reasons, multi-sensory sta-
tion number 1 within the XALL project will have an essential and strategic
role in downloading the app (see Figure 5). Within future museum contexts -
where there will be no multi-sensory stations - it will be enough to integrate
an information QRcode with the information totems or tickets and guaran-
tee a space equipped with a WIFI connection and encourage the download of
the app during the online ticket purchase phase. Having defined the nature
of the mobile application (web app connected to a web server that contains
all the materials of the museum) and the technical functions of the app and its
database, it was possible to start the development of the Beta version of the
UI/web app, currently in the testing and experimentation phase (see Figure 6).
Figure 5: UX maps/UI scenario relating to the visit itinerary of the Palazzo Vecchio
museum with a focus on the “task download” of the web app.
CONCLUSION
The results achieved and reported in this article have demonstrated the poten-
tial and effectiveness of applying Human-Centered Design and Inclusive
Design methodologies in allowing the evaluation and design of museum envi-
ronments that consider human diversity and social inclusion. The analysis
and definition of user-profiles and the evaluation of critical issues of existing
products/systems have allowed the identification of possible design solutions

Enhancing Inclusive Experience in Museums
143
Figure 6: Development of the Beta version of the UI/web app.
and intervention scenarios, defining the requisites that a museum must have
in order to make the cultural heritage accessible to visitors with all types of
disabilities and improve the quality of the visit. Based on this experimenta-
tion, the importance of validating design concepts is highlighted, both the
digital ones (app) simulated in all their steps through Figma and the sensory
ones, such as the tactile stations. Thanks to recent low-cost rapid prototy-
ping techniques, validating and implementing solutions by involving experts
and users before production will be possible. The following articles will pre-
sent the results relating to the development and prototyping of the app (video
guide) and the multi-sensory stations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank: the TIM Foundation, which financed the
research; the polytechnic of Milan, Department of Electronics, Information
and Bioengineering with professor Lanzi Pierluca and dr. Paolo Boffi subse-
quently developed the computer system; the Association MUS.e Musei Civici
Fiorentini, Florence, Italy (Palazzo Vecchio and Stefano Bardini Museum)
and the Bargello National Museum, Florence, Italy; the associations: ENS
(Italian Association of the Deaf), UICI (Italian Union of the Blind and Visu-
ally Impaired) and HABILIA Onlus (Paratetraplegic and Motor Disabled
Association).
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.B. and F.T; methodology,
A.B., E.I; infographics and data curation, E.I and C.B; writing—original draft
preparation, A.B, E.I; writing—review and editing, A.B, E.I and C.B. Supe-
rvision, F.T. and A.B.; project administration, F.T.; funding acquisition, F.T.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Ahmetovic, D., Bernareggi, C., Keller, K. and Mascetti, S., (2021). MusA: artwork
accessibility through augmented reality for people with low vision. In Proceedings
of the 18th International Web for All Conference (pp. 1–9).

144
Brischetto et al.
Barbosa, P., Amorim, P., Ferreira, S. B. L. and Castro, A., (2021). Supporting Spon-
taneous Museum Visits by Deaf People: An Augmented Reality Application and
a Case Study. In Augmented Reality in Tourism, Museums and Heritage: A New
Technology to Inform and Entertain (pp.173–193). Cham: Springer International
Publishing.
Chick, A., (2019). Improving Intellectual Access for Blind and Partially Sighted
Visitors to Temporary Exhibitions: An Inclusive Design Solution. International
Journal of the Inclusive Museum, 12(1).
Dong, H., Clarkson, J., Coleman, R., and Cassim, J. (2012). Design forinclusi-
vity: a practical guide to accessible, innovative anduser-centred design. Gower
Publishing, Ltd.
Gilbert, R. M. (2019). Inclusive design for a digital world: Designing with accessibi-
lity in mind. Apress.
Hanington, B., and Martin, B. (2019). Universal methods of design expanded and
revised: 125 Ways to research complex problems, develop innovative ideas, and
design effective solutions. Rockport publishers.
Hutchinson, R. and Eardley, A. F., (2021). Inclusive museum audio guides: ‘guided
looking’ through audio description enhances memorability of artworks for sighted
audiences. Museum Management and Curatorship, 36(4), pp. 427–446.
ISO 9241–210 (2019). Ergonomics of human-system interaction - Part 210:
Human- centred design for interactive systems. Ginevra: International Standard
Organization.
Kim, W. J., Kim, I. K., Jeon, M. K. and Kim, J., (2016). UX Design guideline for health
mobile application to improve accessibility for the visually impaired. In 2016
International Conference on Platform Technology and Service (PlatCon)(pp. 1–5).
IEEE.
Mäkelä, A. (2020). Multi-sensory Experience Design in Museums.
Manzini, E., and Jégou, F. (2004). “Design degli scenari”, in: Designmultiverso:
appunti di fenomenologia del design. Milão: Edizioni POLI.design, 189–207.
Moncrief, R., Choudhury, S., and Saenz, M. (2022, June). “Efforts to Improve
Avatar Technology for Sign Language Synthesis”, in: Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Envi-
ronments (pp.307–309).
Musiolik, T. H., (2022). Multisensory Experiences in Digital Media. Neuro marke-
ting in Business: Identifying Implicit Purchase Drivers and Leveraging them for
Sales, pp. 1–13.
Nunnally, B., and Farkas, D. (2016). UX research: Practical techniques for designing
better products. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Stanton, N. A., Young, M. S., and Harvey, C. (2014). Guide to Methodology in
Ergonomics: Designing for Human Use. CRC Press.
Vaz, R., Freitas, D. and Coelho, A., (2020). Blind and visually impaired visitors’ expe-
riences in museums: increasing accessibility through assistive technologies. The
International Journal of the Inclusive Museum, 13(2), p. 57.
Waller, S., Bradley, M., Hosking, I. and Clarkson, P. J., (2015). Making the case for
inclusive design. Applied ergonomics, 46, pp. 297–303.

