See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384804033
Promoting Inclusive Visits to a Natural History Museum with a Pre-Visit VR
Tour for Autistic Families
Article  in  Research in Science Education · October 2024
DOI: 10.1007/s11165-024-10207-z
CITATIONS
0
READS
50
4 authors, including:
Nigel Newbutt
University of Florida
44 PUBLICATIONS   752 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Kent Crippen
University of Florida
122 PUBLICATIONS   3,937 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Nigel Newbutt on 10 October 2024.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Accepted: 27 September 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2024
	
 Kent J. Crippen
kcrippen@coe.ufl.edu
Darby Drageset
darbymbattle@ufl.edu
Yu-Chia Kao
yuchiakao@ufl.edu
Nigel A. Newbutt
nigel.newbutt@coe.ufl.edu
1	
School of Teaching and Learning, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Promoting Inclusive Visits to a Natural History Museum with 
a Pre-Visit VR Tour for Autistic Families
Darby Drageset1
 · Yu-Chia Kao1
 · Nigel A. Newbutt1
 · Kent J. Crippen1
Research in Science Education
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-024-10207-z
Abstract
This exploratory study, framed by the Contextual Model of Learning, sought to define the 
personal context of autistic visitors and their families attending a sensory-friendly natural 
history museum event as a science learning experience. The study focused on the motiva­
tions and expectations for visiting the museum, as well as how the inclusion of a VR tour 
could promote inclusivity by better meeting the needs of these visitors and their social 
support groups. A single case study design encompassing five family participant groups 
that varied in age, family composition, and diagnoses was employed. Data collection in­
volved a pre- and non-identical post-visit survey, complemented by a post-visit interview. 
Results indicate that important features of the user experience with the VR museum tour 
included clarity of exhibit text, lack of audio, the ability to measure exhibit features, easy 
navigation, and enhanced museum accessibility. Autistic family groups used the virtual 
tour in three main ways: (1) to prepare for specific exhibits, (2) to prepare for sensory 
experiences, and (3) to build anticipation and set expectations. Two key features of the 
virtual tour supported users’ preparation for their museum visit: the absence of crowds 
and noise and the ability to zoom in and see exhibit text and details. The results highlight 
the positive impact of a VR museum tour on autistic individuals and their families and 
offer crucial insights into the personal and sociocultural contexts of autistic museum visi­
tors and the potential for promoting unique, inclusive, and collaborative forms of science 
learning.
Keywords  Virtual reality · Contextual model of learning · Science · Museum · Autism · 
Inclusion
1 3

Research in Science Education
Introduction
This study is the first in a planned series of studies that will investigate the interaction of the 
personal and sociocultural context of autistic visitors within the physical context of a natural 
history museum. This exploratory study aims to better understand the personal context of 
autistic visitors and their families attending a sensory-friendly natural history museum event 
as a science learning experience. We seek to understand their motivations and expectations 
for visiting the museum, as well as how the inclusion of a virtual reality (VR) tour may 
influence the acclimatization of autistic visitors so that the museum learning environment is 
not only more accessible but inclusive in meeting the needs of these visitors and their social 
support groups. Additionally, we seek to understand how visitors with autism interact with 
the physical context of a natural history museum, what barriers exist in the physical envi­
ronment, and how VR might help prepare these visitors to access the museum. This study 
was designed in collaboration with the education department at a natural history museum, 
autism experts, and autistic individuals.
Autism is characterized by social communication and interaction difficulties and repeti­
tive and restrictive behaviors (Zeidan et al., 2022). These characteristics vary across a con­
tinuum, with every autistic individual experiencing a unique reality. In addition to social 
challenges and repetitive or restrictive behaviors, individuals with autism can experience 
difficulties processing sensory stimuli such as light, touch, and sound. The American Psy­
chological Association (APA) (APA, 2013) describes autistic characteristics related to sen­
sory issues as: “Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory 
aspects of the environment (e.g. apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse response 
to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, visual fascina­
tion with lights or movement)”. These characteristics can manifest as sensory-seeking or 
sensory-avoidant behaviors (Schwartzman & Knowles, 2022). In both cases, sensory sen­
sitivity can act as a barrier to accessing environments not attuned to such needs, including 
non-formal learning environments such as museums, libraries, or other public spaces. In 
addition to a lack of consideration for sensory needs, not knowing what environmental chal­
lenges to expect in a non-formal learning space can further compound these issues (Cena 
et al., 2023). Hoskin et al. (2020) observed five individuals with autism interacting with 
museum exhibits at the Canada Science and Technology Museum. Observational data and 
interview transcripts revealed that low sensory areas, preparation materials, and clear sig­
nage were important resources for autistic museum-goers. These results support the notion 
that non-formal science learning environments can hinder autistic visitors beyond physical 
access to the space.
Non-formal science learning environments are institutions and organizations outside of 
formal school that are structured but highly adaptable (Eshach, 2007). Non-formal science 
learning environments, such as museums, can present challenges for autistic individuals 
through loud noises, flashing lights, and unfamiliar social situations (Varriale et al., 2023). 
The function of these institutions is critical for the contemporary inclusive vision of scien­
tific literacy, which envisions all people effectively and fully applying science in their daily 
lives, workplaces, and society (Kahn, 2023). Within the context of public, formal science 
education settings, Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) require equitable science learning opportunities that are 
appropriately matched to the abilities of all learners (Kahn, 2023). In non-formal science 
1 3

Research in Science Education
education settings, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) functions to prevent discrim­
ination and ensure equal access and opportunities for individuals with disabilities. More 
specifically, when applied within the context of a museum, the ADA results in modifications 
“such as ramps for wheelchair users or closed captions for the D/HH (deaf and hard-of-
hearing)”(p. 134) (Varriale et al., 2023). While these modifications are absolutely necessary 
and required, they often result in museums only approaching inclusivity from a physical 
accessibility perspective, which fails to address visitors who have disabilities that are not 
visible, like autism. This challenges the degree to which meeting accessibility standards is 
sufficient to achieve inclusivity for individuals with autism. Accessibility and inclusivity are 
related concepts but differ in that accessibility focuses on physical access to a space, while 
inclusivity focuses on how individuals participate once they gain access to that environment 
(Reich, 2010). Within the context of a museum, this implies that although an individual 
might be able to physically enter an exhibit, they might not be able to thoroughly perceive 
the space and respond cognitively or socially in productive ways (i.e., fully participate). 
Therefore, inclusivity is multi-dimensional and includes consideration of how individuals 
with disabilities “physically interact with and perceive the space, cognitively engage with 
the materials, and socially interact with one another” (p. 15) (Reich, 2010).
Efforts to provide a specific and modified museum experience for autistic visitors (i.e., 
low stimuli, restricted access to the general public, low noises, and dim lights) can improve 
accessibility (Coates, 2019). To achieve these modified experiences, museums provide sen­
sory maps, noise-canceling earphones, weighted blankets, dimmed lighting, and sensory 
signage to inform visitors about sensory considerations before entering exhibits. Some of 
these modifications are considered pre-visit material, which, in this context, refers to any 
information about the museum experience that visitors can use to prepare or plan for their 
upcoming visit. Pre-visit materials such as sensory maps, information about exhibit content, 
and descriptions of museum activities can help families with autistic children prepare for 
their visit by familiarizing them with the museum environment and setting expectations for 
the visit (Langa et al., 2013). According to Fortuna et al. (2024), planning is essential for 
optimizing the museum experience because it helps alleviate anxiety for autistic individuals 
and their families. Pre-planning for a visit can involve the use of social stories (Adams et 
al., 2004), sensory maps and guides (Langa et al., 2013), reviewing the museum’s website 
for resources and making a plan for what exhibits to visit and how long to stay (Lussenhop 
et al., 2016). While this work acknowledges the benefits of pre-visit materials for autistic 
museum-goers and their families, there is a lack of research investigating the use of tech­
nology as a pre-visit material in this context. Beyond stating that pre-visit materials are 
commonly distributed and accessed through web-based platforms like museum websites 
(Fortuna et al., 2024; Hoskin et al., 2020; Langa et al., 2013; Lussenhop et al., 2016), the 
use of technology other than webpages is not explored. For example, Magkafa et al. (2021) 
explore the co-design of an app for autistic children to use during their museum visit, which 
does involve technology other than a website, but the findings are focused on guidelines for 
including autistic children in co-design, not the use of the app as a pre-visit tool.
In addition to pre-visit materials and sensory modifications, some museums open their 
doors to visitors with autism exclusively, having a dedicated time when only visitors with 
autism and their families or caregivers are permitted. These events are typically described 
and marketed as inclusive or sensory-friendly events (Lussenhop et al., 2016). These 
restricted access events can help with crowding (i.e., having too many people in one space 
1 3

Research in Science Education
at once), which can be overwhelming and overstimulating for autistic visitors (Langa et al., 
2013). A well-known example of sensory-friendly science programming is the Morning at 
the Museum, across the Smithsonian museums. Morning at the Museum takes place before 
regular hours and rotates through the various Smithsonian museums, allowing visitors to 
experience the museums with less crowding. Unfortunately, the characteristics of such 
inclusive, sensory events are not well described in the literature, nor is there a consideration 
of how technology, such as VR, could support visitors in preparing for these events.
In this study, VR is understood to be the “presentation of exclusively virtual and con­
trived objects and situations” that represent the museum environment (p. 37) (Papoutsi et 
al., 2021). VR environments are consistent, predictable, safe, and controllable (Magkafa 
et al., 2021; Lorenzo et al., 2022). These features align well with characteristics of autism, 
such as an insistence on sameness and a desire for predictability. Furthermore, because VR 
environments are safe and controllable, individuals with autism can experience situations 
without fearing negative, real-world consequences (Lorenzo et al., 2022). Additionally, the 
visual nature of VR aligns well with autistic individuals’ preferences to communicate and 
learn via visual means rather than words (Magkafa et al., 2021). Despite the alignment 
between autistic individuals and VR, using VR in educational research with autistic par­
ticipants focuses primarily on social skills. It seldom occurs within the context of natu­
ral history museums (Drageset & Crippen, 2024). In their systematic review of the use of 
VR with autistic individuals in various educational contexts, Drageset and Crippen (2024) 
found that an overwhelming majority of research prioritizes the mitigation of social deficits, 
highlighting a missed opportunity for VR to be used to facilitate learning within non-formal 
environments, like natural history museums. In alignment with their suggestions for future 
work, this study is a first step in utilizing VR to promote social competence and learning 
for autistic individuals in museum environments to promote greater degrees of inclusivity.
Due to the alignment between VR and some autistic individuals, the lack of research 
utilizing VR as a pre-visit material within the context of a natural history museum, and the 
inherently social aspect of museum visits, we aim to explore and understand the potential 
role that VR could play in supporting inclusive, sensory-friendly science learning events at 
natural history museums. To examine this, we utilized an opportunity to collaborate with 
a small natural history museum in the southeastern United States to deploy a VR tour that 
provides a realistic representation of the museum for autistic visitors. To better include 
autistic visitors in a museum of natural history and address gaps in current knowledge, we 
investigated the following research questions:
1.	 What do autistic families perceive as important features of their experience when using 
a VR tour of a natural history museum?
2.	 In what ways do autistic families use a VR tour to prepare for a visit to a natural history 
museum?
3.	 What specific aspects of the VR tour can support greater preparations, if any?
1 3

Research in Science Education
Theoretical Framework and Relevant Prior Research
The Contextual Model of Learning is regarded as one of the most important frameworks for 
interpreting museum learning (Hsu et al., 2018). Falk and Dierking (2013) propose using the 
Contextual Model of Learning to conceptualize a museum learning experience as involving 
the continuous interplay between personal, sociocultural, and physical contexts over time. 
The personal context refers to the variation in visitor interests, motivations, expectations, 
learning preferences, prior knowledge, and developmental levels (Hsu et al., 2018). The 
sociocultural context acknowledges that visitors learn through social interaction during their 
visit and that each visitor is situated within their own culture and has various perceptions 
and expectations for museums. The physical context refers to the physical space visitors 
enter and interact with. In addition to the Contextual Model of Learning, Falk and Dierking 
(2013) view museum visits through a needs-based contextual lens that considers each visit, 
whether alone or in a group, as an attempt to use the physical context to fulfill a personal or 
sociocultural need. For a museum visit to meet a personal or sociocultural need, the visitor 
must be able to reasonably predict the museum experience. Museums are considered “pre­
dictable for most visitors” (p.32) (Falk, 2013), which is why museums can fulfill specific 
needs. The visitor can expect certain experiences and opportunities during their visit due to 
the predictability of the museum’s physical context; however, for visitors who are autistic, 
this might not be the case. Autism is characterized by restricted, repetitive behaviors that 
manifest themselves in an insistence on sameness and inflexibility (Johnson et al., 2016), 
and there is some evidence to suggest that autistic individuals have limited predictive abili­
ties (Sinha et al., 2014). These characteristics of autism call into question the extent to which 
a visitor with autism can have their needs and expectations met by a museum without the aid 
of pre-visit materials to support the predictability of the museum’s physical context.
Three notable research studies have leveraged the insights and requirements of the autis­
tic community to design and develop prototypes aimed at enhancing access to and inclusion 
of individuals with autism in non-formal learning settings (Giaconi et al., 2021; Messina et 
al., 2018; Varriale et al., 2023). Messina et al. (2018) implemented immersive technology 
in museums in Italy, where they used VR and head-mounted displays (HMDs) to develop 
Wearable Immersive Social Stories (WISS) to support individuals with neurodevelopmental 
disorders when they visited museums. Despite the promise, no evaluation or trial of this 
tool has been published. Giaconi and colleagues (2021) utilized participatory design to co-
design a virtual museum tour of a museum in Italy. The resulting VR tour enabled individu­
als with autism “to anticipate both in the external and internal environments, thus ensuring 
greater predictability of the spaces” (p. 101) (Giaconi et al., 2021). Varriale et al. (2023) uti­
lized co-design with autistic children to create an app that included a VR tour of a museum 
in Italy. Their virtual tour functioned as a digital agenda that supports autistic visitors with 
narration, social stories, images, and sounds. Although these three examples represent some 
early work in this area, they do not investigate the full potential of a virtual tour to function 
as pre-visit material. Instead, they focus on the design of the virtual tour and the use of the 
tour during the museum visit.
Additionally, prior research suggests a good fit between VR and autistic users (Newbutt 
et al., 2016; Magkafa et al., 2021; Lorenzo et al., 2022), and that VR could help lessen anxi­
ety and support a notion of predictability (Mitchell et al., 2007). Functioning as pre-visit 
material, a VR tour of a museum could support autistic visitors and their families in pre-
1 3

Research in Science Education
planning for their museum visit, as well as be a sensory-friendly experience by eliminating 
crowds of people, loud noises, inconsistent lighting, and other sensory stimuli associated 
with the museum environment. Although it shows potential, a major challenge of imple­
menting VR within this context is ensuring it is cost-effective and accessible to all potential 
users. As researchers working to improve inclusivity and accessibility, we must ensure that 
the products we deploy are not exclusionary because museums or users do not have the 
funds to access them. Additionally, VR research with autistic individuals must be asset-
based rather than deficit-based. VR research with autistic individuals has been criticized as 
framing characteristics of autism as deficiencies that need to be fixed (Schmidt et al., 2024).
Lastly, in the research that investigates the use of pre-visit material (Fortuna et al., 2024; 
Langa et al., 2013), the families and/or caregivers of autistic museum-goers are included 
as consumers of the pre-visit material. Family groups are said to use the pre-visit material 
to prepare their autistic family member for their visit, which alleviates anxiousness and 
unfamiliarity and helps families or caregivers set expectations for the visit. Hoskin et al. 
(2020) noted in their observational data that support people were a key part of an autistic 
individual’s museum visit. This highlights the importance of considering the larger family 
group when investigating the experience of autistic individuals in museum settings. Not only 
are family members or other support personnel important to autistic individuals’ museum 
experience, but it would be remiss to ignore the inherently social aspect of the museum 
experience. Falk and Dierking (2013) acknowledge the social aspect of the museum experi­
ence in their Contextual Model of Learning. Autistic museum-goers do not experience the 
museum in isolation but rather are influenced by the family members or caregivers they visit 
with. Despite the social nature of visiting a museum, there is a lack of research being done 
with autistic family groups within the context of a museum. Most research on families in 
museum settings only focuses on neurotypical individuals (Langa et al., 2013).
Methodology
The methodology for this study took the form of a single case study design (Creswell & 
Plano Clark, 2017), bounded by the intent to understand the experience of a group of autistic 
families preparing and participating in a unique, sensory-friendly museum event using a VR 
tour as pre-visit material. The experience was designed to emphasize the collective use of 
the VR tour to promote a more accessible and productive museum visit for everyone. The 
limited research on engaging the autistic community in creating educational technology 
interventions, particularly for museum or non-formal science learning, dictated the context-
dependent method and use of inductive data analysis.
Context
The study’s context was a natural history museum in the southeastern United States, which 
is part of a comprehensive research university and includes eight permanent exhibits and 
rotating temporary exhibits. The permanent exhibits highlight local ecology, indigenous 
communities, native flora and fauna, and fossils. As part of an initiative to make the museum 
more accessible and inclusive for all visitors, it implements designated mornings for autis­
tic visitors and their families called Museum for Me. Museum for Me occurs three times a 
1 3

Research in Science Education
year and involves the museum opening three hours early on a Sunday for autistic visitors 
and their families. The designated mornings enable visitors to explore the museum with a 
significantly reduced number of visitors and alterations to the exhibits, such as lower light­
ing, reduced sounds, and sensory signage outside exhibits. In addition, during the event, the 
museum provides a sensory map, quiet space, and fidgets.
Participants
The study received IRB approval from the University’s review board (IRB202300259). 
Recruitment protocols and engagement with participants were carefully considered by the 
research team to ensure ethical and respectful interactions with our autistic participants and 
their families. Convenience sampling was used to enroll participants, and a formal diagnosis 
of autism was not required to participate (self-diagnosis was acceptable). Recruitment fliers 
were distributed at a prior Museum for Me event, advertised via social media platforms, 
and emailed through listservs provided by local autism support groups. Local news also 
disseminated the opportunity to participate in the study. The recruitment of participants was 
limited to those who had attended prior Museum for Me events or were involved with a part­
ner local autism support group. Compensation in the form of an annual pass to the museum 
was provided to families who participated in the study.
Families who expressed interest in participating in the study received a packet in the mail 
that included consent forms with a pre-visit survey, a QR code to the VR museum tour, and 
instructions for completing and returning the packet. All members of the family group were 
required to complete and return the consent forms, while only autistic members of the fam­
ily were asked to complete and return the pre-visit surveys. After completing the consent 
forms and surveys, all family members became participants and were instructed to use the 
VR museum tour before they visited the museum during the sensory-friendly event. Partici­
pants could access the VR museum tour on any compatible device, such as a mobile phone, 
tablet, or laptop. They had the flexibility to explore the VR museum tour at their conve­
nience regardless of time or location and could view the tour as many times as they desired.
The five family participant groups, all included at least one autistic member, varied in 
age, family composition, and diagnoses. Table 1 provides the demographics and family 
makeup of those who participated in the study and completed all data collection points. 
Two families registered to participate but did not complete the study due to failing to attend 
Museum for Me.
Virtual Reality Technology
A VR tour of the museum was created using Matterport, an online, computer-based virtual 
tour platform/software that provides a 360-degree VR view of a physical space. The VR 
tour was created by museum staff but had not been used with visitors yet. The virtual tour 
offers several navigation options, including a 3D dollhouse view of the entire museum, a 
floor plan representing an overview map, and circle tags highlighting ways to navigate the 
space (Fig. 1). The 360-degree virtual platform features interactive and engaging functions. 
For example, users can navigate the exhibits by clicking on the circle tags, also known as 
‘hot spots’ in the virtual tour. Additionally, users can zoom in on the exhibits to read full-
text descriptions and explore exhibit features more closely. This computer-based VR tour 
1 3

Research in Science Education
differs from immersive virtual reality (IVR) in head-mounted displays (HMDs) and Cave 
Automatic Virtual Environments (CAVEs), in that it lacks “immersive features that block 
out the physical world, and enable users to feel psychologically located in the simulated 
environment” (p. 183) (Bailey & Bailenson, 2017).
The virtual tour was accessible to the participants via any computer screen or smart 
device connected to the internet at their homes. Participants did not access the virtual tour 
via headsets. Instead, they were given instructions on navigating the VR museum tour via 
tablets, mobile phones, or computers using printed materials mailed to their homes. They 
were asked to explore the VR museum tour before their actual museum visit.
Data Collection
Data collection involved a pre- and non-identical post-visit survey complemented by a post-
visit interview. The pre-survey provided information about participant demographics, the 
Fig. 1  (Left) Example of the floor plan view of the entire museum in Matterport. (Right) Example of the 
hotspots used to navigate the virtual tour (the light colored circle features on the floor)
 
Family ID
Position in Family
Gender
Age
Autistic
1
Mom
Female
35
Dad
Male
38
X*
Son
Male
6
X
Daughter
Female
9
X
2
Mom
Female
42
Dad
Male
49
Son
Male
4
X
3
Mom
Female
36
X
Dad
Male
36
Daughter
Female
6
X
4
Mom
Female
55
Dad
Male
50
Daughter
Female
19
Son
Male
11
Son
Male
12
X
5
Mom
Female
50
Son
Male
14
X
Table 1  Family group demo­
graphic data
Note *The Dad in Family 1 is 
self-diagnosed
 
1 3

Research in Science Education
degree to which participants prepare for a museum visit and intend to use the VR museum 
tour to support their preparation, and participant expectations for their visit and the VR 
museum tour. After completing the pre-survey, participants were instructed to view the VR 
museum tour before attending the Museum for Me event. After attending the event, autis­
tic participants were asked to complete a post-survey that provided information about the 
degree to which they felt prepared for their visit and the extent to which the VR museum 
tour supported their preparation. The post-survey mirrored but was not identical to the pre-
survey. Additionally, each family group scheduled a time for a semi-structured interview. 
The semi-structured interviews were recorded and transcribed for data analysis and lasted 
approximately 20 min. The semi-structured interview provided information about each fam­
ily’s expectations for the sensory-friendly event and the VR museum tour, details regarding 
how families used the virtual tour before their museum visit, and features of the virtual 
tour that either supported or hindered the experience. The authors crafted the guiding ques­
tions for the interview and leveraged their experience in museum education, educational 
technology, and autism. Approximately half of the inquiries were centered around the fam­
ily’s experience at the museum during the sensory-friendly event, with the remaining half 
directed towards their engagement with the VR tour.
Pre and post-surveys were compared across autistic participants to find key similarities 
and differences. In the conception of this study, the surveys and interviews were consid­
ered complementary and equally integral for answering our research questions; however, 
after data collection and analysis, it became evident that the interview transcripts were far 
more substantial. The interview transcripts were coded inductively and thematically using 
MAXQDA software (VERBI Software, 2021). Given the lack of detailed theory for the 
interactions among family members, inductive coding was used to ensure the analysis was 
grounded in the experiences and insights of each family unit, leading to a more nuanced and 
authentic understanding of the use of the VR tour and its influence on the perceptions of par­
ticipants. Four themes and 13 codes were identified (Table 2). The first and second authors 
coded the transcribed interviews separately, noting instances where each research question 
was being addressed, which became the first three themes in Table 2. The fourth theme in 
Table 2, Suggested Changes, emerged from families providing feedback for changes that 
could be made to the VR tour to enhance its usefulness. After agreeing on the themes and the 
coded segments that represented them, the first and second authors independently re-coded 
the segments using phrases such as clarity of text, visit preparation, and easy navigation 
that reflected the sentiment of the text. The first and second authors compared and discussed 
these named segments until a consensus was reached on the 13 codes in Table 2. Due to the 
surveys not adequately providing data to answer the research questions, only the two ques­
tions about the expectations that autistic participants had for the Museum for Me event and 
their museum visit were used.
Results
The overarching aim of this study was to explore how the personal and sociocultural con­
texts of autistic visitors intersect with the physical environment of a sensory-friendly event 
at a natural history museum. The objective being to gain a deeper understanding of the 
motivations and expectations of autistic visitors and their families for attending such an 
1 3

Research in Science Education
Theme
Code
Definition
Examples
Important 
Features 
of User 
Experience
Clarity of Text
The clarity of text 
allowed users to read por­
tions of the exhibit.
“You can literally, those things are so good 
that you can read the signage on the 
walls.” (Family 2)
No Audio
The lack of audio was 
beneficial to the user.
“So that was super helpful. I think as far 
as preparing, that was one thing that really 
helped us a lot was for him to be able to see 
it without being just fully immersed in the 
darkness and the noise.” (Family 1)
Measure
The VR tour allowed 
users to measure features 
of the exhibits.
“Probably everybody was measuring the 
jaws, or the mammoth, whatever we were 
trying to measure, and the being you had a 
lot of points of where we could transition to 
move, and that was great.” (Family 4)
Easy Navigation Navigating the VR tour 
was easy for the user. Hot 
spots were mentioned as 
a feature of the navigation 
that was positive and easy 
to use.
“We liked that because we it was easy to 
move around…, there’s not a lot of options 
somewhere to go. And this gave us a lot of 
options, on where we wanted to go, and I 
like that.” (Family 4)
Access
The ability for individuals 
to experience the museum 
without physically having 
to visit.
“It was kinda like being able to go to the 
museum without actually having to leave 
your house.” (Family 2)
How the VR 
Tour was 
Used
Anticipation
The VR tour elicited 
excitement about visiting 
the museum in the future.
“…to get him excited to go and to, and he 
was thought we were going the next day to 
be honest, and was really disappointed that 
we weren’t going the next day…” (Family 4)
Exhibit 
Preparation
The VR tour supported 
the preparation of a user 
to visit a specific exhibit 
at the museum.
“It’s dark and it’s just kind of very scary to 
him. And usually when we go by that area 
he’ll sit and wait for us outside while we go 
inside. But during the with the virtual tour, 
you’re actually able to access it pretty in 
depth. So that was good for him to be able to 
access it and to see it on the phone. I was re­
ally happy to see that he handled it really 
well.” (Family 1)
Sensory 
Preparation
The VR tour supported 
the preparation of the user 
for specific sensory expe­
riences at the museum.
“I think that the experience help the sensa­
tional process… Changing from one to an­
other one and that experience of looking that 
video actually help them to feel prepared.” 
(Family 5)
Aspects of 
the VR Tour 
that Support 
Preparation
Closer to 
Exhibits
The VR tour allowed 
users to zoom in and get 
closer to exhibits than 
they normally would be 
able to at the museum.
“She really liked being able to get closer 
to exhibits than she can get in person. 
And like she really like to go up under the 
wooly mammoth and like look all around 
like really close. Whereas like in person 
like obviously like you can’t really get that 
close.” (Family 3)
Less People
The user benefitted from 
the VR tour having less 
people depicted in the 
tour than they would 
normally encounter at the 
museum.
“…so helpful that we didn’t have to fight to 
get to see things.” (Family 4)
Table 2  Codebook
1 3

Research in Science Education
event, as well as to assess the effectiveness of a VR tour in preparing or acclimating these 
visitors to the museum setting. The following sections address each research question using 
quotes from the semi-structured interviews. Then, findings from the open-ended pre-visit 
survey will be used to highlight the expectations and motivations of autistic visitors and 
their families for attending a sensory-friendly event at a natural history museum. As men­
tioned, the semi-structured interviews provided more robust and substantial data to address 
our research questions. Due to this revelation, we focus on the interviews to answer our 
research questions. The only data used from the survey is reflected in the Expectations and 
Motivations section below. In this section, quotes from two open-ended pre-survey ques­
tions highlight the expectations and motivations of autistic participants and their families for 
visiting a sensory-friendly event at a natural history museum.
Important Features of User Experience
Results from the interviews indicate that important features of the user experience with the 
VR museum tour included clarity of exhibit text, no audio, the ability to measure exhibit 
features, easy navigation, and enhanced museum accessibility. Family 1 appreciated the 
clarity of text in the VR tour because it afforded them the ability to “take time to read”. 
Family 1 also mentioned that not having audio during the VR tour was an important feature 
of their son’s experience. The lack of audio helped their son “to be able to see [the exhibits] 
without being just fully immersed in the darkness and the noise”. Additionally, the ability 
to measure elements of the exhibits was a key feature of the user experience with the VR 
tour. The VR tour featured a measuring device that allowed users to measure the features of 
the exhibits. Family 3 mentioned that their daughter enjoyed this experience and used the 
measuring device to measure the shark jaws and the mammoth. Another significant aspect 
of user experience was the ease of navigation, as highlighted by Family 4, who found it 
“sharp, clear, and easy to navigate,” enhancing their enjoyment. Enhanced museum acces­
sibility and inclusivity were also an important feature of user experience. Family 2 noted 
that the virtual tour helped individuals “go to the museum without actually having to leave 
[their] house”, which extends access to those who might otherwise be unable to visit. Addi­
tionally, Family 3 shared that the tour improved accessibility by allowing their daughter to 
Theme
Code
Definition
Examples
Suggestions 
for Changes
Difficult 
Navigation
Navigating the VR tour 
was difficult for the user. 
Hot spots were mentioned 
as a feature of the naviga­
tion that was challenging 
to use.
“I think for me it was just confusing trying 
to like figure out how to get different 
places.” (Family 3)
Unclear Text
The clarity of some of 
the text could have been 
better.
“The things where you read is like it’s too 
blurry to read.” (Family 5)
Novelty
The VR tour would have 
been more helpful if the 
participant was visiting 
the museum for the first 
time.
“This totally would have been far more 
helpful to me if this were my first time.” 
(Family 2)
Table 2  (continued)
 
1 3

Research in Science Education
“go up under the woolly mammoth” and explore areas that would not be feasible during an 
in-person visit.
How the VR Tour was Used
Autistic family groups used the virtual tour in three main ways: to prepare for specific 
exhibits and sensory experiences, build anticipation, and set expectations. Family 1 dis­
cussed how they used the virtual tour to help prepare their son with autism for entering an 
exhibit he typically avoids. At the Natural History Museum there is an Indigenous com­
munities exhibit in a dark, loud room. Family 1 shared that the exhibit is “very scary” to 
their son and that he waits for them outside when they go into that exhibit. The virtual tour 
allowed him to “access it and to see it on the phone”, which led to him entering the exhibit 
for the first time during the Museum for Me event. Regarding preparing for sensory experi­
ences, Family 4 shared that the virtual tour allowed them to “see areas that [could] be poten­
tial triggers” for their child with autism, while Family 1 analyzed certain museum areas to 
reassure their child that they were not frightening. Additionally, some families utilized the 
virtual tour to help their children build anticipation and set expectations for their museum 
visit. For instance, Family 4 mentioned that the tour helped get their son excited to visit the 
museum and plan for what they would see.
Aspects of the VR Tour that Support Preparation
Two key features of the virtual tour supported users’ preparation for their museum visit: 
the absence of crowds and noise and the ability to zoom in and see exhibit text and details 
clearly. The lack of crowds and noise within the VR museum tour proved beneficial for 
most families, allowing them to explore exhibits without navigating the stimulating aspects 
of the museum environment. This feature facilitated focus on exhibit content without the 
distractions of waiting in line or excessive noise. Additionally, a few families mentioned the 
benefits of zooming in during the virtual tour to read the exhibits and get closer to objects 
they are not allowed to get close to at the museum. Overall, the absence of crowds and noise 
and the ability to zoom in enhanced access to museum content for autistic visitors and their 
families. These features of the VR tour provided a more comfortable and focused environ­
ment for exploring exhibits, allowing autistic individuals to engage with the content without 
the sensory overload often experienced in traditional museum settings.
Suggestions for Changes
The semi-structured interviews let us learn more about how participants would change the 
VR tour to fit their needs better. Although some autistic individuals and their families felt 
the VR tour was easy to navigate and contained clear text, a few individuals felt the naviga­
tion and overall clarity could be improved. Family 2 and Family 3 mentioned that the num­
ber of hotspots made navigating to different museum sections more difficult. Furthermore, 
the son from Family 5 felt the text could be clearer and suggested that the VR tour allow him 
to click on certain text elements of exhibits to enlarge them for reading.
1 3

Research in Science Education
Expectations and Motivations
In the pre-visit survey, participants were asked open-ended and Likert-type questions about 
their expectations for the sensory-friendly event and their overall museum visit. More spe­
cifically, the Likert-type questions gauged how prepared the autistic participants felt for 
their visit. Despite previous visits, the autistic children in Family 2 and Family 5 reported 
feeling unprepared. Of similar sentiment, in response to an open-ended question asking 
what participants expected from the sensory event, the mom in Family 3 indicated she did 
not know what to expect, but she did anticipate the museum to be a place where she could 
“educate her daughter” and see unique things. In response to the same question, the dad in 
Family 1 expected the sensory-friendly event to be when he could relax and see exhibits 
with his family “without many distractions”. The children in Families 1, 2, and 3 all men­
tioned that they expected to learn during their visit to the museum, and the children in Fami­
lies 1, 4, and 5 expressed their expectation to have fun. Specifically, one child in Family 1 
looked forward to being less afraid of the exhibits, and the child in Family 2 anticipated a 
calmer environment.
Discussion
The results reveal significant insights into the personal and sociocultural contexts of autistic 
individuals and their families related to this science learning experience. Notably, despite 
prior visits to the museum, not all autistic individuals felt adequately prepared for their 
upcoming visit, underscoring the value of the VR tour in enhancing feelings of readiness. 
Speaking with autistic participants highlighted how the VR experience mitigated anxiety 
and fostered predictability, aligning with previous research (Mitchell et al., 2007). This sug­
gests that VR technology can be used as pre-visit material to encourage accessibility and 
inclusion in natural history museums. The VR tour provided autistic individuals and their 
families the opportunity to view museum content without leaving their homes and func­
tioned as a tool families could use to help prepare their autistic family member(s) for what 
they would encounter during their museum visit. Specifically, the VR tour functioned as a 
pre-visit tool that helped autistic individuals prepare for exhibits and sensory experiences. 
These results corroborate the findings of Lanaga et al. (2013) and Hoskin et al. (2020) by 
supporting the notion that pre-visit materials for autistic visitors and their families are ben­
eficial and help familiarize visitors with the museum.
Additionally, insights from the semi-structured interviews highlighted barriers within the 
museum context, such as exhibits with loud noises and dim lighting and issues related to 
crowding, all of which posed challenges for autistic visitors. The needs of autistic visitors 
in this study support the notion that sensory sensitivities can act as a barrier to accessing 
museum environments that are not specifically attuned to the sensory needs of its guests. 
From a legal perspective, the ADA requires public institutions, including non-formal learn­
ing institutions like museums, to remove all barriers that would prevent physical access 
(ADA, 1990). This legislation does not mandate that museums remove barriers for people 
with intellectual or sensory differences. In addition to the legislative requirements, to be 
more inclusive of all visitors, museums must consider providing experiences and structuring 
environments that acknowledge dimensions of inclusivity besides physical access. Solely 
1 3

Research in Science Education
focusing on physical accessibility is no longer adequate (Schwartzman & Knowles, 2022). 
Our results illustrate how autistic visitors can physically access museum exhibits, but still 
experience barriers during their visit.
Furthermore, the results offer insights into how autistic individuals and their families 
experience a natural history museum. Museum visits are inherently social, as Falk and Dier­
king (2013) acknowledged in their Contextual Model of Learning. Individuals with autism 
who visit museums do not do so in complete isolation but are influenced by family mem­
bers, caregivers, other museum visitors, and museum staff. Despite the social nature of visit­
ing a museum, there is a lack of research being done with autistic family groups within the 
context of a museum. The research on families in museum settings typically only focuses on 
neurotypical individuals (Langa et al., 2013). As a step towards better understanding autistic 
individuals and their families in museum contexts, this study sheds light on how families 
help support their autistic family members as they participate in a sensory-friendly event 
at a natural history museum. The semi-structured interviews with all five family groups 
revealed that all families, regardless of composition, helped prepare their autistic family 
members for their museum visit. Specifically, Families 1, 4, and 5 used the VR tour to pre­
pare their autistic family members for exhibits they intended to visit, and Families 4 and 5 
used the tour to prepare their autistic children for certain sensory elements at the museum. 
Future work should investigate the potential of a VR tour of the museum to prepare autistic 
individuals for social situations they will encounter in a museum context, such as paying for 
their entrance into the museum and speaking with docents or other museum staff.
In addition to providing information on the personal and sociocultural context of autistic 
visitors, the results reveal key features of the VR tour that supported preparation. Namely, 
the absence of crowds and noise and the ability to zoom in and clearly see exhibit text and 
detail. This gives us information regarding the interaction between the museum’s physical 
context and the individual’s personal context. Individuals with autism might be entering 
the museum space with sensory needs that the museum fails to meet. The VR tour helped 
support autistic individuals in viewing museum content while meeting their sensory needs. 
This supports the notion that museums need to consider the sensory needs of their guests to 
achieve greater inclusion and accessibility (Schwartzman & Knowles, 2022).
Limitations
Limitations are inherent to any study, and the instrumentation was the biggest factor here 
as we were limited to researcher-created measures with self-reported data. Self-reported 
data is notorious for social desirability bias—participants telling us what they think we 
want to hear instead of their true thoughts and feelings. We minimized this bias by creating 
a safe environment, using non-leading questions, and encouraging open, free expression. 
However, there is also the potential for parental influence on children’s responses. Due to 
the young age of most of the autistic participants, parents provided support in answering 
the surveys and responding to interview questions and may have had an undue influence.
Additionally, the small sample size and the heterogeneity of autism limits the generaliz­
ability of our findings. Autism is a spectrum disorder, with each individual experiencing a 
unique reality. As a result, we acknowledge that the results from this study are unique to its 
participants. Furthermore, this study is situated in a small natural history museum, which 
1 3

Research in Science Education
influences the nature of the results. Due to the specificity of the context, we cannot general­
ize these results to all museums or even natural history museums.
Conclusion and Future Work
The results of this study highlight the positive impact of a VR museum tour on autistic indi­
viduals and their families. Through the immersive experience of the VR tour, participants 
found it to be a valuable tool in preparing for their museum visit. Notably, the tour aided in 
familiarizing autistic individuals and their families with exhibits and sensory experiences, 
enhancing their overall readiness and comfort level. This underscores the potential of VR 
technology in creating inclusive and accessible science learning experiences for individu­
als with autism and their families. In addition to preparation, autistic individuals and their 
families highlighted image clarity, the absence of overwhelming crowds and noise, and the 
ability to zoom in to see detail as important features of a VR museum tour that supported 
their visit preparation. These results suggest that VR can be used as a pre-visit material to 
encourage accessibility and inclusion in natural history museums. Future research should 
explore the utility of using VR tours in other non-formal science learning environments to 
facilitate greater degrees of inclusion. Family 3 specifically mentioned the need for other 
places like zoos and aquariums to offer a virtual tour. This speaks to the value of VR tours 
for autistic individuals and their families who want to venture out into more non-formal 
science spaces.
Additionally, the findings offer crucial insights into the personal and sociocultural con­
texts of autistic museum visitors. We gained a deeper understanding of their expectations 
and sensory requirements for visiting a natural history museum, as well as the role of a VR 
tour in preparing or acclimatizing autistic visitors to a museum learning environment. This 
understanding serves as a foundation for utilizing VR to support more inclusive museum 
experiences in the future, tailored to meet the diverse needs of this population. By enhanc­
ing cognitive engagement and facilitating science learning for autistic individuals in future 
studies, we aim to acknowledge but move beyond the physical dimension of inclusivity to 
foster a more enriching museum experience for autistic visitors.
Future research will acknowledge the aspects of the physical context of natural history 
museums that can act as barriers to individuals with autism. Additionally, efforts will be 
made to understand how autistic individuals engage with exhibits. We will explore what 
learning looks like for autistic visitors in natural history museums, what barriers prevent or 
make learning difficult, and how VR could facilitate learning for this visitor population. It 
is evident from our results that a VR tour of a natural history museum can help prepare and 
acclimatize autistic visitors, but more work needs to be done to understand how a VR tour 
can reinforce learning through the exposure of educational material in a virtual context fol­
lowed by a real-life experience with the same content.
Funding  The authors did not receive support from any organization for the submitted work.
Data Availability  The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from 
the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Code Availability  Not applicable.
1 3

Research in Science Education
Declarations
Ethical Approval  All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with 
the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Dec­
laration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The study was approved by the University 
of Florida Institutional Review Board (IRB202300259).
Consent to Participate  Participants provided informed consent to participate.
Consent for Submission  All authors approve the manuscript for submission.
Conflict of Interest  All authors certify that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organization 
or entity with any financial interest or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in 
this manuscript.
Why this Manuscript Should be Published in Research in Science Education  This original research adds to 
our understanding of providing inclusive science learning experiences in nonformal learning spaces. It offers 
unique and crucial insights into the personal and sociocultural contexts of autistic museum visitors and their 
social support systems. In addition to the intellectual merit provided by the methodology, this study achieves 
broad impact by emphasizing and promoting the assets of autistic people and an asset-based approach to 
designing science learning experiences. This topic will be an excellent fit for the Journal as it represents 
unique empirical research that furthers the potential for understanding science education as an inclusive and 
equitable endeavor that occurs in a diverse range of contexts.
Issues Related to Journal Policies  All authors certify that we do not have or anticipate any issues with the 
Journal’s policies.
Originality of Submission  The authors confirm that the content of the manuscript has not been published or 
submitted for publication elsewhere.
Special Issue  This manuscript is not being submitted for consideration for a special issue.
References
Adams, L., Gouvousis, A., VanLue, M., & Waldron, C. (2004). Social story intervention. Focus on Autism 
and Other Developmental Disabilities, 19(2), 87–94. https://doi.org/10.1177/10883576040190020301
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
American Psychiatric Association.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, As Amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12182 et seq. (1990).
Bailey, J. O., & Bailenson, J. N. (2017). Immersive virtual reality and the developing child. In Cog­
nitive Development in Digital Contexts (pp. 181–200). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-809481-5.00009-2
Cena, F., Mauro, N., & Rapp, A. (2023). How do sensory features of places impact on spatial exploration 
of people with autism? A user study. Information Technology & Tourism, 25(1), 105–132. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40558-023-00244-1
Coates, C. (2019). Making the Museum Autism Friendly-Best Practice from Around the World - Museum 
Next. https://www.museumnext.com/article/making-the-museum-autism-friendly/
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2017). Designing and conducting mixed methods research (3rd ed., p. 
520). SAGE Publications, Inc.
Drageset, D. B., & Crippen, K. J. (2024). A systematic review of the use of virtual reality in formal, informal, 
and non-formal learning environments for individuals with autism. Interactive Learning Environments, 
1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2024.2405702
Eshach, H. (2007). Bridging In-school and out-of-school learning: Formal, non-formal, and informal 
education. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(2), 171–190. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10956-006-9027-1
1 3

Research in Science Education
Falk, J. H. (2013). The museum experience revisited (L. D. Dierking, Trans.). Taylor & Francis.
Fortuna, J., Chamberlain, E., Filice, L., Kurt, M., & Porter, T. (2024). Exploring the usefulness of pre-visit 
materials for children with autism at a public museum. Translational Science in Occupation, 1(1). 
https://doi.org/10.32873/unmc.dc.tso.1.1.04
Giaconi, C., Ascenzi, A., Del Bianco, N., D’angelo, I., & Capellini S. A. (2021). Virtual and augmented 
reality for the cultural accessibility of people with autism spectrum disorders: A pilot study. The Inter­
national Journal of the Inclusive Museum, 14(1), 95–106. https://doi.org/10.18848/1835-2014/CGP/
v14i01/95-106
Hoskin, E., Singh, A., Oddy, N., Schneider, A. L. J., Trepanier, G., Trudel, C., & Girouard, A. (2020). Assess­
ing the experience of people with autism at the Canada Science and Technology Museum. Extended 
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–7. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3334480.3382834
Hsu, T. Y., Liang, H., Chiou, C. K., & Tseng, J. C. R. (2018). CoboChild: A blended mobile game-based 
learning service for children in museum contexts. Data Technologies and Applications, 52(3), 294–312. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/DTA-05-2016-0042
Johnson, N. L., Burkett, K., Reinhold, J., & Bultas, M. W. (2016). Translating research to practice for chil­
dren with autism spectrum disorder: Part I: Definition, associated behaviors, prevalence, diagnostic pro­
cess, and interventions. Journal of Pediatric Health Care: Official Publication of National Association of 
Pediatric Nurse Associates & Practitioners, 30(1), 15–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedhc.2015.09.008
Kahn, S. (2023). Special needs and talents in science learning. In Handbook of Research on Science Educa­
tion: Volume III (pp. 325–358). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780367855758-14
Langa, L. A., Monaco, P., Subramaniam, M., Jaeger, P. T., Shanahan, K., & Ziebarth, B. (2013). Improving 
the Museum experiences of children with Autism Spectrum disorders and their families: An exploratory 
examination of their motivations and needs and using web-based resources to meet them. Curator: The 
Museum Journal, 56(3), 323–335. https://doi.org/10.1111/cura.12031
Lorenzo, G., Newbutt, N., & Lorenzo-Lledó, A. (2022). Global trends in the application of virtual real­
ity for people with autism spectrum disorders: Conceptual, intellectual and the social structure of 
scientific production. Journal of Computers in Education, 9(2), 225–260. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40692-021-00202-y
Lussenhop, A., Mesiti, L. A., Cohn, E. S., Orsmond, G. I., Goss, J., Reich, C., Osipow, A., Pirri, K., & 
Lindgren-Streicher, A. (2016). Social participation of families with children with autism spectrum dis­
order in a science museum. Museums & Social Issues, 11(2), 122–137. https://doi.org/10.1080/15596
893.2016.1214806
Magkafa, D., Newbutt, N., & Palmer, M. (2021). Implementing co-design practices for the development of 
a museum interface for autistic children. A. L. Brooks, S. Brahman, B. Kapralos, A. Nakajima, J. Tyer­
man, & L. C. Jain (Eds.), Recent advances in technologies for inclusive well-being: Virtual Patients, 
Gamification and Simulation (Vol. 196, pp. 421–443). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-59608-8_22
Messina, N., Matarazzo, V., Occhiuto, D., Gelsomini, M., & Garzotto, F. (2018). Museum for All: 
Wearable Immersive Virtual Tours in Museums for People with Neurodevelopmental Disor­
ders. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 364, 012047. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1757-899X/364/1/012047
Mitchell, P., Parsons, S., & Leonard, A. (2007). Using virtual environments for teaching social understand­
ing to 6 adolescents with autistic spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 
37(3), 589–600. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-006-0189-8
Newbutt, N., Sung, C., Kuo, H.-J., Leahy, M. J., Lin, C.-C., & Tong, B. (2016). Brief report: A pilot study of 
the use of a virtual reality headset in autism populations. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disor­
ders, 46(9), 3166–3176. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-016-2830-5
Papoutsi, C., Drigas, A., & Skianis, C. (2021). Virtual and augmented reality for developing emotional intel­
ligence skills. International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering Science & IT (IJES), 
9(3), 35. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v9i3.23939
Reich, C. (2010). Inclusion, Disabilities, and Informal Science Learning (J. Price, E. Rubin, & M. Steiner, 
Trans.; CAISE Inquiry Group Report). Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education 
(CAISE).
Schmidt, M., Newbutt, N., Lee, M., Lu, J., Francois, M. S., Antonenko, P. D., & Glaser, N. (2024). 
Toward a strengths-based model for designing virtual reality learning experiences for autistic 
users. Autism: The International Journal of Research and Practice, 28(7), 1809–1827. https://doi.
org/10.1177/13623613231208579
Schwartzman, R., & Knowles, C. (2022). Expanding accessibility: Sensory sensitive programming for muse­
ums. Curator: The Museum Journal, 65(1), 95–116. https://doi.org/10.1111/cura.12452
1 3

Research in Science Education
Sinha, P., Kjelgaard, M. M., Gandhi, T. K., Tsourides, K., Cardinaux, A. L., Pantazis, D., Diamond, S. P., & 
Held, R. M. (2014). Autism as a disorder of prediction. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences of the United States of America, 111(42), 15220–15225. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1416797111
Varriale, L., Cuel, R., Ravarini, A., Briganti, P., & Minucci, G. (2023). Smart and Inclusive museums for 
visitors with Autism: The App Case A Dip in the Blue. S. Za, R. Winter, & A. Lazazzara (Eds.), Sus­
tainable digital transformation: paving the way towards smart organizations and societies (Vol. 59, pp. 
133–152). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15770-7_9
VERBI Software (2021). MAXQDA (Version 2022) [Computer software]. VERBI Software. Available from 
maxqda.com.
Zeidan, J., Fombonne, E., Scorah, J., Ibrahim, A., S Durkin, M., Saxena, S., Yusuf, A., Shih, A., & Elsabbagh, 
M. (2022). Global prevalence of autism: A systematic review update. Autism Research: Official Journal 
of the International Society for Autism Research, 15(5), 778–790. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.2696
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a 
publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manu­
script version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
1 3
View publication stats

