Welcoming All Visitors: 
Museums, Accessibility, and 
Visitors with Disabilities
Caroline Braden
Guest Accessibility/Special Needs Assistant
The Henry Ford
University of Michigan 
Working Papers in Museum Studies:
Number 12 (2016)

Museum Studies Program
Charles H. Sawyer Center for Museum Studies
University of Michigan Museum of Art
525 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1354
Office phone: 734-936-6678
Fax: 734-786-0064
	
	
www.ummsp.rackham.umich.edu
ummsp@umich.edu
© 2016 The Regents of University of Michigan
All rights reserved
The University of Michigan Museum Studies Program’s series of “Working Papers in Museum Studies” presents emerging 
research from a variety of disciplinary perspectives, all focused on the multiple concerns of the modern museum and heri­
tage studies field. Contributions from scholars, members of the museum profession and graduate students are represented.  
Many of these papers have their origins in public presentations made under the auspices of the Museum Studies Program.  
We gratefully thank the authors published herein for their participation.    
Caroline Braden was a member of the 2013 cohort of the University of Michigan Museum Studies Program.  Since her 2014 
graduation from the University of Michigan School of Education, she has been employed as Guest Accessibility/Special 
Needs Assistant at The Henry Ford in Dearborn, Michigan.  She is a recent recipient of a Leadership Exchange in Arts and 
Disability (LEAD) Award from the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.

Introduction
According to Americans with Disabilities: 2010, a report 
by the U.S. Census Bureau, more than 56 million Ameri­
cans, or over 20 percent of the U.S. population, have dis­
abilities. By 2015, that number had grown by 2.2 million 
and it is only likely to continue to rise in the years ahead 
(Leist, Levinsky-Raskin, and Stemler, 2015). The aging of 
the Baby Boom population, with approximately 20 percent 
of the U.S. population being over the age of 65 by the year 
2030, is likely to bring an increase in the number of people 
with diminished eyesight, hearing, mobility, and cognition 
(Bienvenu, 2015). Also, the number of people affected 
by developmental and cognitive disorders and diseases, 
such as autism and Alzheimer’s, is continually increasing. 
When family members and companions of people with 
disabilities are included, these overall numbers become 
even larger.
More than ever before, people with disabilities are living 
independently and going out to explore places within their 
communities. However, a 2012 Survey of Public Partici­
pation in the Arts conducted by the National Endowment 
for the Arts (NEA) found that adults with disabilities 
comprised less than seven percent of all adults attending 
performance events or visiting art museums or galleries  
(summarized in Bienvenu, 2015). Although 21 percent of 
all adults visited an art museum or gallery in 2012, only 
11 percent of adults with disabilities made such a visit. For 
museums, people with disabilities represent a very large 
potential audience that is beneficial to attract and retain.
In her book, Programming for People with Special Needs: 
A Guide for Museums and Historic Sites (2014), Katie 
Stringer touches upon the consequences for museums of 
the passage of the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA). Under ADA, museums and other public spaces 
were required to become accessible to all populations. 
This helped open the door for new audiences by providing 
guidelines for museums to make their spaces and program 
offerings more physically accessible. Increasingly, 
museums have been going beyond the legal obligations of 
the ADA to enhance their service to all audiences, partic­
ularly focusing more recently upon serving visitors with 
developmental and cognitive disabilities, such as autism 
and dementia.
In addition, the very definition of what disability means 
and how to address it has changed. Whereas disability 
used to be defined by a medical model and a diagnosis of 
an individual’s functional limitations, it is now viewed 
more as a status or group that anyone can join at any time 
and that can be temporary or permanent (Stringer, 2014; 
Leist, Levinsky-Raskin, and Stemler, 2015). This shift in 
thinking has brought about a focus on removing barriers to 
make places more accessible for and inclusive of all peo­
ple, providing opportunities and education for people with 
a range of abilities, and encouraging people with disabili­
ties to get involved as community members, advisors, and 
decision makers.
This paper provides an overview of the field of accessi­
bility within museums—where it currently stands and 
the direction it appears to be going. It begins with a look 
at how the ADA has affected, and continues to influence, 
museums. This is followed by an exploration of some of 
the many ways that museums have tailored their exhibi­
tions, offerings, programs, work with community groups, 
and staff training to be inclusive of people with different 
kinds of disabilities. These examples come both from 
museums across the country and from my own experienc­
es enhancing accessibility at The Henry Ford in Dearborn, 
Michigan. The examples are then connected to three 
broader topics: the ongoing transformation of the museum, 
learning and visitors, and the value of museums for 
individuals and to society. The paper concludes with 
a look at the future of the field of accessibility within 
museums, particularly its potential for growth in the years 
ahead.
Museums and the ADA
The Americans with Disabilities Act grew out of a 
disability rights movement undertaken by a disability 
UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)
Welcoming All Visitors: Museums, Accessibility, 
and Visitors with Disabilities
Caroline Braden, The Henry Ford

community comprised of people with mobility, hearing, 
visual, and cognitive or developmental disabilities that 
gained momentum after World War II (Stevens, 2015). It 
passed in 1990, following other related civil rights legisla­
tion. The ADA sought to guarantee equal access for people 
with disabilities to employment, government programs 
and services, public accommodations, transportation, and 
communications (Stevens, 2015).
Before the passage of the ADA, museums in the United 
States had varying levels of experience in accommodating 
visitors and staff with disabilities. Some museums were 
ahead of their time. The Metropolitan Museum of Art in 
New York City, for example, held talks for blind school 
children as early as 1913, while the Boston Children’s 
Museum opened a landmark exhibit in 1976, called “What 
If You Couldn’t?,” that was designed to help children and 
their families better understand the challenges of living 
with a disability (Mohn, 2013; Stevens, 2015). In the 1970s 
and 1980s, various institutions began responding to the 
needs of people with disabilities by adding ramps, curb 
cuts, accessible parking, new signage, large print versions 
of labels, and other types of enrichment activities (Stevens, 
2015). However, expanding accessibility and inclusion was 
“not always a swift and universal process” and many 
museums had still not adapted inclusive changes for visi­
tors with disabilities well into the 1980s (Stevens, 2015, p. 
27).
The passage of the ADA “really made people think,” states 
Beth Ziebarth, Director of the Accessibility Program at 
the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. (Stevens, 
2015, p. 27). Museums started planning, budgeting for, and 
implementing facility improvements. Museums also began 
incorporating an increasing number of accommodations 
and programs to enhance accessibility and inclusion for 
visitors with a range of abilities. Typically, these offerings 
went beyond the legal obligations of the ADA and repre­
sented a move towards a “greater emphasis on communi­
ty, diversity, and inclusion” (Cohen-Stratyner, 2015, pp. 
64-65). In the sections that follow, I explore some of these 
offerings and accommodations, particularly as they relate 
to exhibits, programming, work with community groups, 
and staff training.
Universal Design and Inclusive Museum 
Exhibits 
“Universal Design” is broadly defined as “the design of 
products and environments to be usable by all people, to 
the greatest extent possible, without the need for adapta­
tion or specialized design” (Hartley, 2015, p. 42). Universal 
Design enhances everyone’s experience and encourages 
us to “put ourselves in another’s shoes” (Snyder-Grenier, 
2015, p. 3). The phrase was coined in the 1980s by archi­
tect, wheelchair user, and founder and program director 
of the Center for Universal Design at North Carolina State 
University, Ronald Mace. He helped shift the conversation 
from one about meeting legally mandated requirements 
in the design of products and environments to one about 
designing products and environments that benefit everyone 
(Hartley, 2015).
Mace and the Center for Universal Design developed 
seven principles of Universal Design (Hartley, 2015, pp. 
42-43). The first of these is “equitable use,” the design is 
useful and marketable to people with a range of abilities. 
Second is “flexibility in use,” the design accommodates 
a wide variety of individual preferences and abilities. 
Third is “simple and intuitive use,” use of the design is 
easy to understand, regardless of the user’s experience, 
knowledge, language skills, or concentration level. Fourth 
is “perceptible information,” the design communicates 
necessary information effectively to the user, regardless of 
ambient conditions or the user’s abilities. Fifth is “toler­
ance for error,” the design minimizes possible accidental 
or unintended errors. Sixth is “low physical effort,” the 
design can be used efficiently and with a minimum of 
fatigue. Seventh is “size and space for approach and use,” 
appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach, 
and use, regardless of the user’s body size or mobility.
Universal Design principles have been increasingly incor­
porated into the design of museum exhibits. To showcase 
some examples and commemorate the 25th anniversary 
of the passage of the ADA, the National Association for 
Museum Exhibition (NAME) devoted the entire Fall 2015 
issue of its publication, Exhibitionist, to Universal Design. 
Several examples emerged as models of best practice in 
the field.
Staff at the White House Visitor Center in Washington, 
D.C. took Universal Design into consideration when 
renovating existing space and creating a new space be­
tween 2012 and 2014 (York, 2015). Within their new space, 
staff aimed to ensure that visitors of all abilities could be 
oriented to the exhibits and locations referenced in the ex­
hibits by incorporating multiple modes of presenting and 
receiving information (visual, tactile, and audio) into their 
interpretations of content (York, 2015).
Figure 1 on the next page shows an example of Universal 
Design in a display at the White House Visitor Center. 
In this display, a raised, tactile map of a section of the 
White House is accompanied by Braille and three different 
opportunities for tactile interaction (a piece of horsehair 
upholstery fabric once used on a chair in the Cross Hall, a 
reproduction of a bison head carved on the State Dining 
UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                     	
	
	
        4                                                

Through experiences with exhibit design, staff at the 
White House Visitor Center learned the importance of 
incorporating design decisions that impact visitors with a 
range of abilities into the initial concept stages of design, 
as well as the need to budget for multiple ways of present­
ing information (York, 2015). They also discovered that 
engaging with people with disabilities during all project 
phases was instrumental in ensuring that the museum was 
providing inclusive and meaningful experiences for all 
visitors (York, 2015).
Another museum that has embraced the principles of 
Universal Design is the Lower East Side Tenement 
Museum in Manhattan—a museum of historical apart­
ments that have been restored to represent different 
UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                       	
	
	
        5                                                
periods and interpret the lives of families who once lived 
and worked in the tenement building (Bader, 2015). Over 
the years, staff at the Tenement Museum has created a 
series of accommodations on their guided tours to better 
meet the needs of their visitors with disabilities (Bader, 
2015). These include: having folding chairs available in the 
apartments, large-print versions of primary source materi­
als, objects to touch, and training for staff members to help 
them use descriptive language during their tours (Bader, 
2015). While these accommodations were initially 
provided because visitors had requested them, staff 
members discovered that the modifications were actually 
benefitting everyone, making all visitors more engaged 
and inclined to participate (Bader, 2015).
Room mantel, and a reproduction of a doorknob from the 
North Portico Entry). While some of these features are 
specifically aimed at creating a more meaningful experi­
ence for visitors who are visually impaired, they actually 
enhance the experience for all visitors by extending and 
adding to the information in labels and photographs. In 
this way, the exhibit takes visitors’ different needs and 
abilities into consideration by incorporating both visual 
and tactile representations of content.
Figure 1: Universal Design in use in an exhibit at the White House Visitor 
Center (Photograph by author).

This understanding led staff to shift their approach from 
incorporating accommodations into existing tours to 
actually creating an entire new tour experience in 2010 
that built upon the principles of Universal Design (Bader, 
2015). Some of the strategies incorporated into this tour 
included: considering physical access and comfort from 
all angles; designing content to meet the needs, cognitive 
abilities, and interests of all visitors; providing multiple 
ways for visitors to engage with the space, content, and 
tour; and experimenting with new technology (Bader, 
2015). Overall, staff discovered that using these strategies 
enabled them to provide a “richer and much more univer­
sally accessible tour” (Bader, 2015, p. 33) and one that is 
now used as an example for making museums and other 
sites more welcoming and relevant to all visitors.
Museum Offerings and Programs for People 
with Disabilities: An Overview
Museum offerings and programs for people with 
disabilities tend to be designated for use by the following 
audiences: individuals with mobility limitations; individu­
als who are blind or partially sighted; individuals who are 
deaf or hard of hearing; individuals with developmental 
and/or learning disabilities and those on the autism 
spectrum; and individuals with dementia and their care­
givers. The east coast, particularly New York City with its 
large, diverse population and vast array of museums, has 
been a hotbed of accessibility work in recent years. Other 
museums across the United States are increasingly placing 
more focus on accessibility initiatives.
Examples of some of the different offerings for these 
audiences come from research that I have conducted on 
museums’ websites, observations that I have made while 
taking part in various museums’ accessibility programs, 
my own experiences developing and implementing acces­
sibility programs at The Henry Ford, conversations I have 
had with people working within the field, and sessions that 
I have attended during the Leadership Exchange in Arts 
and Disability (LEAD) Conference. The LEAD Confer­
ence, held each August, is the only conference specifically 
devoted to accessibility at cultural institutions.1 
Individuals with Mobility Limitations: The types of offer­
ings for individuals with mobility limitations tend to be 
the most thought about by museums and the most closely 
aligned with the ADA requirements. Offerings for these 
individuals include: wheelchairs, motorized scooters, 
ramps, elevators, accessible seating areas in auditoriums 
and theaters, accessible parking spots, and curb cuts. 
Museums are also paying more attention to physical access 
by ensuring wheelchair access to physical spaces and 
installing exhibits and displays that accommodate people 
with mobility limitations.
Another offering that some museums have for individ­
uals with mobility limitations is an accessible map. For 
example, maps at Colonial Williamsburg and Old Stur­
bridge Village show buildings that are fully accessible, not 
accessible, or have limits to accessibility. Some museums 
have also created ways to help people view exhibit areas 
or buildings that are not fully accessible. For example, 
a virtual tour created by the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space 
Museum in New York City that is available on its website 
shows photographs and 360 degree panoramic views of 
inaccessible areas of its ship.
Individuals Who Are Blind or Partially Sighted: Offerings 
for individuals who are blind or partially sighted include 
large print labels, Braille labels and maps, audio guides, 
and audio description (descriptive narration of visual 
elements). There are also a number of different tactile 
offerings available at museums for these individuals.
One such offering is a touch tour, in which visitors are 
encouraged to explore different objects—either real or 
replicas—through touch (which may or may not involve 
using gloves). Offered upon request or sometimes sched­
uled as a public offering, touch tours can be found at 
museums ranging from the Metropolitan Museum of Art 
to the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeol­
ogy and Anthropology to The Henry Ford. In addition to 
touch, such tours generally also include verbal description, 
in which works of art and objects are described by guides 
in great detail.2 
Figure 2 (on the following page) shows a touch tour at The 
Henry Ford, in which members of the National Federation 
of the Blind of Michigan are exploring the Rosa Parks Bus 
through touch. Touch tours at The Henry Ford include op­
portunities to touch artifacts, such as the Rosa Parks Bus 
and Allegheny Locomotive, as well as handheld models of 
artifacts (such as a Model T die-cast model and 3D printed 
Dymaxion House) and various historic automobiles while 
using gloves. 
UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                       	
	
	
        6                                                

UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                            	
	
	
        7                                                
Other offerings for individuals who are blind or par­
tially sighted include tactile diagrams with raised dots 
and dashes representing outlines of artworks, TacTiles 
with raised versions of artworks, and objects or models 
of objects that can be touched and handled. Specialized 
classes and programs for this audience are also available. 
One such program offered at the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art is called “Seeing Through Drawing.”  In this program, 
participants create works of art inspired by objects in the 
museum’s collection that are described to them by sighted 
instructors and that they can touch.
Individuals who are Deaf or Hard of Hearing: For indi­
viduals who are deaf or hard of hearing, museums offer 
closed captioning on video screens, assistive listening 
devices, real-time captioning, and sign language inter­
pretation (see Figure 3 on next page). Tours and programs 
may also be led by sign language interpreters and include 
voice interpretation, such as the case with the “An Evening 
of Art and ASL” program at the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, which is open to all people – regardless of whether 
they know sign language or not. The Whitney Museum of 
American Art has also developed video blogs, or vlogs, 
with short videos featuring deaf museum educators com­
municating about artworks in American Sign Language. 
In addition to giving people an opportunity to access the 
museum without being physically present, these vlogs 
have also become popular among people without hearing 
impairments (Leist, Levinsky-Raskin, and Stemler, 2015; 
Mohn, 2013).3 
Figure 2: A touch tour at The Henry Ford (Photograph by author, courtesy of 
The Henry Ford).

UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                            	
	
	
        8                                                
Individuals with Developmental and/or Learning Disabil­
ities and Those on the Autism Spectrum: Offerings for 
individuals with developmental and/or learning disabilities 
can include specialized multisensory programs, hands-on 
explorations, and art-making classes. The Intrepid Sea, 
Air & Space Museum offers a family program for children 
with developmental and learning disabilities, that includes 
a tour of the museum and art-making activities designed to 
offer a fun, educational, and structured social experience 
for families. The New York Transit Museum also has a 
number of specialized programs for children with devel­
opmental and/or learning disabilities and on the autism 
spectrum. One of these programs, “Travel Training,” is 
designed to teach children about riding on the subway—
an important life skill in New York City, while “Subway 
Sleuths” allows students on the autism spectrum who have 
a passion for trains and transit to share experiences and 
interests.
For children with autism and their families, museums are 
increasingly developing and providing various types of 
supports. To assist with pre-visit planning, for example, 
many museums have created social stories and other visual 
guides or schedules that use pictures and text to prepare 
children for the sights, sounds, smells, and possible tastes 
and things to touch that they will encounter. At The Henry 
Ford, we partnered with the Autism Alliance of Michi­
gan to create such social stories for Henry Ford Museum, 
Greenfield Village, and the Ford Rouge Factory Tour, 
which families can access both on the websites for The 
Henry Ford and the Autism Alliance of Michigan.
Also for visitors with autism and their families, museums 
are offering “sensory-friendly” days, during which the 
museums may open early for these families (so spaces are 
less crowded and quieter) and have other supports in place. 
Such supports can include: reductions in loud sounds and 
lights; noise-cancelling headphones and earplugs; sensory 
friendly maps, which show areas of a museum that are qui­
Figure 3: Sign language interpretation is provided during a presentation in the Tin 
Shop in Greenfield Village at The Henry Ford (Photograph by author).

UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                             	 	
	
        9                                                
et, crowded, bright, and have subdued light; and designat­
ed quiet spaces. At The Henry Ford, we held our first-ever 
sensory-friendly days during April 2016. In addition to all 
of the supports listed above, these events included hands-
on activities located in quieter areas, resource tables 
with information for families from the Autism Alliance 
of Michigan and The Color of Autism Foundation, and 
sensory-friendly movies in our Giant Screen Experience 
theater, in which the lights were turned up and the sound 
was turned down. Our sensory-friendly days were a result 
of a collaboration between The Henry Ford and other mu­
seums in the Detroit metropolitan area, with the museums 
working together to share resources and publicity. We also 
developed “sensory assistance kits” at The Henry Ford, 
which are available at all times at our admission desks. 
These kits contain noise-cancelling headphones, earplugs, 
and communication boards with pictures to use for com­
municating with someone who is nonverbal (see Figure 4).   
Figure 4: Sensory Assistance Kit at The Henry Ford ( Photograph by author).
the first museum to create and offer a program specifically 
for individuals with dementia and their caregivers. “Meet 
Me at MoMA” has served as a model for similar programs 
across the country.4  Such programs tend to have a theme 
and identify a number of artworks and objects that fit 
the theme. They also often involve various art-making 
activities. The programs tend to be inquiry- and discus­
sion-based, with guides asking questions that foster con­
versation and spark memories among participants. These 
types of programs are spreading across the country and 
more museums have been developing partnerships with 
their local Alzheimer’s Associations in recent years.
Training for staff members so that they know what to 
expect and how to react to individuals on the autism 
spectrum is another step museums are taking to better 
serve visitors on the autism spectrum. Prior to the sen­
sory-friendly days at The Henry Ford, for example, staff 
from the Autism Alliance of Michigan helped to train 
museum staff members to better understand the character­
istics of autism and how to communicate and interact with 
someone on the autism spectrum.
Individuals with Dementia and Their Caregivers: The 
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City was 

UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                             	 	
	
        10                                                
Collaborating with Community Organizations 
and Museums
A phrase that has been making the rounds in accessibility 
and disability rights communities in recent years is “noth­
ing about us without us” (Bienvenu, 2015, p. 30). In other 
words, in order to ensure that offerings for different kinds 
of audiences are meeting audiences’ needs, museums 
should work with, listen to, and incorporate the desires 
and needs of people with disabilities into their planning 
and work. This can mean reaching out to organizations 
within the community surrounding a museum that serve 
people with different kinds of disabilities and attending 
group meetings to ask members how the museum can 
benefit them.
At The Henry Ford, for example, while developing and 
testing our touch tours, I worked with members of the Na­
tional Federation of the Blind of Michigan and the Greater 
Detroit Agency for the Blind and Visually Impaired. These 
individuals provided feedback that helped to ensure that 
the touch tours would meet their needs and expectations. 
In addition, staff members from the Michigan Department 
of Education-Low Incidence Outreach (an organization 
that provides materials and resources to students with vi­
sual impairments) provided invaluable training on working 
with individuals who are blind or have low vision to staff 
members giving the touch tours at The Henry Ford. I also 
worked closely with the Autism Alliance of Michigan and 
The Color of Autism Foundation while planning and car­
rying out our sensory-friendly days. These organizations 
not only assisted with preparations for the days—such 
as creating social stories for Henry Ford Museum and 
Greenfield Village, they also helped us with marketing, 
since they had many of their own contacts to whom they 
were able to get the word out. In addition to organizations 
such as these, it can also be beneficial to reach out to such 
places as the Hearing Loss Association of America and the 
Alzheimer’s Association when developing programs for 
these particular audiences.
Building relationships with people in the community, such 
as those using the services of different community groups, 
can help a museum lay a foundation for the creation of an 
advisory committee comprised of representatives from 
various local organizations, people with disabilities, dis­
ability advocates, and museum staff (Braden, 2015). Such 
a committee is useful for reviewing and providing feed­
back on a museum’s accessibility practices and initiatives 
and can also help a museum maintain an awareness of 
people’s needs within its community (Braden, 2015).
Cultural organizations in various cities and regions across 
the country have also created accessibility consortia. Such 
consortia provide members with opportunities to discuss 
and share ideas on accessibility initiatives at their insti­
tutions and to partake in professional development. New 
York was the first city to have a museum access consor­
tium. The New York Museum Access Consortium (MAC) 
provides a network of mutual support to help practitioners 
engage with people with disabilities and disability advo­
cates to learn about, implement, and strengthen best prac­
tices for access and inclusion (Bienvenu, 2015). In addition 
to holding regular meetings to share ideas, MAC also 
has a website, on which they share helpful resources and 
list all of the access programs happening across the city.5  
Using MAC’s model, the Detroit area has also started to 
take steps towards creating our own access consortium. 
Our consortium had its roots in the collaborative work that 
was undertaken by local museums to put together senso­
ry-friendly events in April 2016. Since then, the number 
and type of institutions involved in the consortium has 
grown and we have been holding periodic meetings to 
discuss accessibility-related projects at our institutions.
Training Staff to Work with People with Dis­
abilities
Since ensuring access and inclusion are part of everyone’s 
job in a museum in one way or another, training staff to 
work with people with disabilities should be museum-wide 
(see Braden, 2015). While staff may have received some 
disability training related to the ADA in the past, newer 
types of training are needed to help all staff think about 
the wide variety of visitors coming to their museums.
At the very least, staff members should be trained on 
applicable and relevant laws, while also being made aware 
of disability etiquette (such as using people-first language 
– that is, “people with disabilities,” rather than “handi­
capped people”). Additionally, staff members could be 
given opportunities to have direct experiences with people 
with different types of disabilities, such as a low vision 
training in which a person who is blind attends and gives 
tips or a panel session in which people with various types 
of disabilities share their experiences. Activities, such 
as moving around a space in a wheelchair or being led 
through a space while wearing a blindfold, can also help 
staff members understand what it is like to have different 
disabilities. Using the resources offered by museum staff 
members with disabilities, representatives from local 
organizations serving people with disabilities or special 
education teachers from local schools can also be helpful 
in training staff and raising awareness about the behaviors, 
desires, and needs of people with disabilities.
Ways to train staff members are extensive and varied and 
can range from tips sheets to hour-long training sessions to 

all-day workshops. All of these can be helpful in training staff 
members to better understand their visitors, their museum’s 
offerings for these visitors, and to learn how to better commu­
nicate with all visitors. Such training can also be beneficial in 
simply raising awareness among staff that people with disabili­
ties are visiting their museums.
For small museums, it is beneficial for staff members to be 
knowledgeable about their museums’ offerings for visitors with 
disabilities and to have strategies in mind for interacting with 
visitors with different types of disabilities. For larger muse­
ums, training can be more specialized to the types of roles of 
particular staff members. Front-line staff members, for exam­
ple, should be trained to interact with and provide excellent 
customer service to all visitors. Staff members in the educa­
tion department should have skills in creating and facilitating 
accessible programming for all audiences. Exhibit preparators 
should be provided with tools to make accessible exhibits and 
environments, such as those listed in the Smithsonian Guide­
lines for Accessible Exhibition Design.6  Additionally, market­
ing staff members should know how to effectively reach out to 
and engage with the disability community, while staff members 
in development should be given tools and language to be able 
to speak about this with donors. In general, all staff members 
in both small and large museums should have some kind of dis­
ability awareness training. See “Suggested Training Resources” 
at the end of this paper for websites with tips and strategies.  
Connection to the Broader Museum Field: The 
Ongoing Transformation of the Museum
Traditionally, museums have existed to collect and preserve 
objects, exhibiting and maintaining them not only for the 
public, but also for use and inquiry by scholars (Hooper-Green­
hill, 1992; Weil, 1999; Hein, 2000). Within this model, power 
relations within museums have been skewed towards curators, 
who make decisions about what may be viewed, how it may be 
seen, and when (Hooper-Greenhill, 1992). In contrast, the pub­
lic’s interaction with collections has traditionally been curtailed 
to looking at “fully completed and immaculately presented 
displays” (Hooper-Greenhill, 1992, p. 7). Furthermore, the 
public has tended to accept the idea that if certain objects are 
in museums, they are “not only real but represent a standard of 
excellence” (Cameron, 1971, p. 17).
In his now classic article, “From Being about Something to Be­
ing for Somebody: The Ongoing Transformation of the Amer­
ican Museum,” Stephen Weil (1999) argued that museums are 
shifting from an inward focus upon the growth, care, and study 
of their collections to a more outward focus upon the provision 
of educational services to the public. According to Hilde Hein 
(2000, p. 2), as museums endeavor to expand their educational 
services and reach new audiences, they also strive to become 
“more democratic in their structure and more responsive at all 
levels to the interests of a broad-based public.”  One conse­
quence of this has been a change in exhibits from being 
less “linear” to more public-oriented (Hein, 2000, p. 5). In 
addition, museums are increasingly involving audiences in 
developing public programs and exhibits, evaluating pro­
grams and exhibits to understand their impact on audienc­
es, and striving to make museum spaces more adaptable to 
a variety of public uses (Weil, 1999).
The growing commitment to accessibility within muse­
ums reflects this ongoing transformation of the museum. 
In endeavoring to expand museum content to reach all 
audiences —including those with a range of disabilities—
museum staff members involved with accessibility and 
accessible exhibits attempt to make offerings and exhibits 
more responsive to the needs, interests, and desires of the 
public. Working with community organizations and listen­
ing to the needs and desires of people with disabilities can 
help museums to identify people’s needs and work towards 
addressing them through their exhibits and offerings. 
Conducting visitor studies with such individuals can also 
be beneficial in evaluating whether needs are met.
The rise in touch tours and other multisensory offerings 
illustrates this transformation. In more traditional exhibits, 
with the focus placed upon labels and objects, vision is the 
primary sense used. As a result, people who are blind or 
visually impaired—and even people with other types of 
disabilities—would likely not get much out of the experi­
ence. By incorporating tactile and other multisensory ele­
ments (i.e., sounds or smells), however, people with visual 
impairments and other kinds of disabilities are able to get 
much more out of the overall experience, learning more 
about the content presented than they would have been 
able to otherwise. Additionally, including such features 
can benefit all visitors, enabling there to be multiple entry 
points and ways in which to discover and learn about the 
content presented.
Involving audiences in developing programs and exhibits, 
evaluating the impact of those programs and exhibits on 
the audiences, and adapting museum spaces to fit a wide 
variety of audiences and their needs and abilities are all 
significant to the field of accessibility. Each also illustrates 
a move away from the more traditional use and existence 
of museums toward the newer types of museums described 
by Weil.
Connection to the Broader Museum Field: 
Learning and Visitors
As articulated by Falk, Dierking, and Adams in their 2006 
article “Living in a Learning Society: Museums and Free-
Choice Learning,” in the constructivist theory of learning 

that now dominates approaches to meaning-making in muse­
ums, learning is understood as being influenced by an individ­
ual’s personal, socio-cultural, and physical contexts over time. 
In other words, learning is an active and contextualized process, 
dependent not only upon the content of exhibits and programs, 
but also upon individuals’ prior knowledge, experiences, 
interests, abilities, and what they see, do and talk about while 
within the museum setting (see also Hein, 2006). From this per­
spective, learning in and from museums is not just about what 
museums wish to teach visitors, but also about the meaning the 
visitor makes of the museum experience (Mason, 2006). Within 
this “contextual model of learning,” none of these three contexts 
is ever stable or constant (Falk, Dierking, and Adams, 2006, p. 
327). Instead, all change over an individual’s lifetime.
Falk, Dierking, and Adams (2006) describe each of these three 
contexts in more detail in their article. The personal context 
represents the personal and genetic history (i.e., past knowl­
edge, interests, and beliefs) that an individual carries with 
him/her into a learning situation. In this respect, learning is 
influenced by an individual’s selection and control of his/her 
learning. Within the socio-cultural context, museum learning 
is influenced by an individual’s upbringing and culture, the 
meaning and authority an institution like a museum has within 
the individual’s community and culture, and interactions that 
occur not only within the visitor’s own social group while at a 
museum, but also with others at the museum (such as guides or 
performers). The physical environment (i.e., lighting, crowding, 
presentation, context, and the quality and quantity of informa­
tion presented) also impacts visitors’ learning experience in mu­
seums. Beyond these three contexts, it is also important to take 
into account what happens in visitors’ lives and environments 
after their museum visit that relates to their initial experiences 
and plays a role in what is learned.
Personal, socio-cultural, and physical contexts influence the 
learning of all museum visitors and that includes visitors with 
different kinds of disabilities. For these visitors in particular, 
the physical context may have an even more significant influ­
ence upon learning than it does for visitors without disabilities. 
For example, wheelchair accessibility through a space—or lack 
thereof—can affect learning by people with mobility limita­
tions by determining whether they can gain access to all parts 
of an exhibition. Furthermore, size of label text, lack of closed 
captioning, or lack of tactile elements could put limits on the 
learning done by people with visual impairments, hearing 
impairments, or various cognitive disabilities. Similarly, for 
individuals on the autism spectrum, factors such as sounds, 
lights, and crowds can all have significant influences upon 
whether these individuals are able to focus and learn within 
their surroundings.
When developing offerings, programs, and exhibits for all 
visitors, and especially for visitors with different types of 
disabilities, it is important to keep these different contexts 
and their influences in mind. In developing exhibitions 
or programming, museum staff should keep in mind that 
that learning is highly individualized and that the museum 
space itself facilitates interaction and communication. For 
example, when creating an offering like a touch tour for 
people who are blind or a family program for children on 
the autism spectrum, if supports (such as models of objects 
for people who are blind or social stories for people on 
the autism spectrum) are put into place at a museum, they 
would likely have a significant impact upon the learning 
that happens while individuals are within the museum 
setting.
Connection to the Broader Museum Field: 
The Value of Museums for Individuals and to 
Society
According to Stephen Weil (2002), in his article, “Muse­
ums: Can and Do They Make a Difference?” the initial 
attribute of a “good museum” is that it is “operated with 
the hope and expectation that it will make a positive 
difference in the quality of people’s lives” (p. 61). Since 
the factor that makes museums truly distinctive is their 
objects, museums can use the “awesome power of those 
objects” to trigger a range of human experiences: “social, 
spiritual, therapeutic, aesthetic” (Weil, 2002, pp. 71, 70). 
Museums should offer a supportive environment for every­
one, regardless of their backgrounds and needs (Museums 
Association, 2013).
The many offerings, programs, and exhibit techniques 
mentioned above illustrate that museums are indeed work­
ing in ways aimed at using their existing objects, stories, 
and spaces to make a positive difference in the quality of 
people’s lives—whatever their abilities or needs. Although 
it may take additional supports (i.e., large print labels, 
touch tours, social stories, etc.) for people with disabilities 
to be able to experience all that museums have to offer, 
many steps are being taken in that direction. For example, 
with dementia programs, museums are bringing people in 
and using the museums’ collections and stories in ways 
aimed at improving the quality of these people’s lives 
by triggering memories and fostering social interaction 
among participants and their caregivers.
Beyond enriching people’s lives, museums also have a po­
tential to contribute to “strong and resilient communities” 
by understanding how they can improve their surrounding 
areas and working to create better places to live (Muse­
ums Association, 2013, p. 2). This can mean museums and 
their audiences working closely together, thereby enabling 
museums to make better use of their collections and other 
resources to meet the needs and interests of the public.

Listening to and working with people with disabilities and 
the community groups serving them are very important for 
ensuring that museums’ programs and offerings are meeting the 
needs and interests of their intended audiences. Additionally, by 
understanding their surrounding communities and the people 
within them, museums can contribute to stronger communities 
by having offerings and programs in place that better meet 
the needs, interests, and desires of their community members. 
For example, knowing that parents of children on the autism 
spectrum could benefit from understanding the community re­
sources and organizations available to them, many museums are 
starting to offer events for children on the autism spectrum that 
not only have these organizations represented, but also enable 
parents to socialize with other parents having the same expe­
riences. Focusing on such audiences and having programs like 
this helps museums contribute to stronger communities.
Conclusion
The future for accessibility within museums looks bright. 
Museums are increasingly creating programs and offerings for 
people with disabilities. Participation at the LEAD Conference 
grows each year. Museum access consortia, like that in New 
York, are spreading to new cities and regions across the coun­
try. The American Alliance of Museums (AAM) has also been 
placing more focus on accessibility and inclusion recently, high­
lighting “diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion” as one 
of three focus areas in its strategic plan for 2016-2020, devoting 
an entire issue of its Museum magazine to accessibility in 2015, 
and hosting periodic accessibility-focused webinars. With the 
number of people having disabilities steadily on the rise and 
more focus and awareness being devoted to how museums can 
draw in this large, significant audience, there is only reason to 
think that this field will continue to grow in the years ahead.

UM Working Papers in Museum Studies: Number 12 (2016)                          	
	
	
        14                                                
End Notes 
1.  For more information about the LEAD Conference, see http://education.kennedy-center.org/education/accessibility/lead/. 
2. For more information about touch tours at museums, see “At some museums, blind visitors can touch the art,” by Menachem 
Wecker (https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/museums/at-some-museums-blind-visitors-can-touch-the-
art/2015/07/09/df4a5bba-fd6d-11e4-833c-a2de05b6b2a4_story.html) and “Philly Touch Tour guides those with low vision 
through the arts,” by Brandon Baker (http://www.phillyvoice.com/philly-touch-tours-guides-low-vision-accessibility/).
3.  To learn more about and watch the Whitney’s video blogs featuring Deaf museum educators communicating in ASL, see 
http://whitney.org/Education/Access/Vlogs. 
4.  For more information about Meet Me at MoMA and resources for designing museum programs for people with dementia, see “The 
MoMA Alzheimer’s Project: Making Art Accessible to People with Dementia.”
5.  See http://museumaccessconsortium.org/ for more information about the Museum Access Consortium, resources for making 
facilities and programs more accessible to people with disabilities, and a list of access programs happening across New York City.
6.  See https://www.si.edu/Accessibility/SGAED for the Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible Exhibition Design.
Suggested Training Resources
For disability awareness training tips and strategies see:
•	
“Working Document of Best Practice: Tips for Making All Visitors Feel Welcome,” Museum Access Consortium, http://museu­
maccessconsortium.org/resource/inclusionary-best-practices-tips-for-making-all-visitors-feel-welcome/. (Includes general 
recommendations, tips, and best practices for interacting with visitors with different kinds of disabilities.)
•	
“Disability Equality Training Resources,” Museum of Modern Art, https://www.moma.org/learn/disabilities/resources.  
(Includes general recommendations, tips, and best practices for interacting with visitors with different kinds of disabilities.)
•	
“Disability Awareness Training,” Art Beyond Sight, http://www.artbeyondsight.org/handbook/dat-accessibility-skills.shtml.  
(Includes strategies and tips for communicating and interacting with people with different kinds of disabilities.)
 

References
Bader, M.
     2015 Historic sites and Universal Design: Lessons from 
the Tenement Museum.  Exhibitionist, 34(2), 28-33.
Bienvenu, B. 
     2015 Museums and ADA@25: Progress and looking 
ahead. Museum, 94(5), 29-34.
Braden, C.
     2015 Exploring the field of visitor accessibility at the 
LEAD conference. ALHFAM Bulletin, 45(3), 11-14 
Cameron, D.
     1971 The museum, a temple or the forum. Curator, 
14(1), 11-24.
Cohen-Stratyner, B.
     2015 How ADA + excellence & equity became Univer­
sal Design. Exhibitionist 34(2), 64-69.
Falk, J. H., Dierking, L.K. and Adams, M.
     2006 Living in a learning society: Museums and free-
choice learning. In S. Macdonald (Ed.), A companion to 
museum studies (pp. 323-339). Oxford: Blackwell.
Hartley, M.
     2015 Shifting the conversation: Improving access with 
Universal Design. Exhibitionist, 34(2), 42-48.
Hein, G. E.
     2006 Museum education. In S. Macdonald (Ed.), A 
companion to museum studies (pp. 340-352). Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Hein, H.
     2000 The museum in transition: A philosophical per­
spective. Washington, DC:  Smithsonian Institution Press.
Hooper-Greenhill, E.
     1992 Museums and the shaping of knowledge. London: 
Routledge.
Leist, A., Levinsky-Raskin, S., and Stemler, B. J.
     2015 Visitor voices: A story of accessibility and inclu­
sion. Museum, 94(5), 36-42.
Mason, R.
     2004 Museums, galleries, and heritage: Sites of 
meaning-making and communication. In G. Corsane (Ed.), 
Heritage, museums, and galleries: An introductory reader 
(pp. 200-214). London: Routledge.
Mohn, T.
     2013 (October 27) Welcoming art lovers with disabili­
ties. The New York Times, p. F4
Museums Association
     2013 Museums change lives. London: Museums Asso­
ciation.
Snyder-Grenier, E.
     2015 Letter from the editor. Exhibitionist, 34(2), 3.
Stevens, G.
     2015 Museums and ADA@25: A look back. Museum, 
94(5), 26-27.
Stringer, K. 
     2014 Programming for people with special needs: A 
guide for museums and historic sites. Lanham, MD: Row­
man and Littlefield.
Weil, S. E. 
     1999 From being about something to being for some­
body: The ongoing transformation of the American muse­
um. Daedalus, 128(3)m 229-258.
Weil, S. E.
     2002 Making museums matter. Washington, DC: Smith­
sonian Institution Press.
York, S.
     2015 The White House Visitor Center: A case study in 
inclusive exhibition design. Exhibitionist, 34(2), 50-55.

