University of Wisconsin Milwaukee
UWM Digital Commons
Theses and Dissertations
December 2018
Creating Inclusive Experiences in Children's
Museums for Children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder
Cassandra Coffey
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Follow this and additional works at: https://dc.uwm.edu/etd
Part of the Library and Information Science Commons
This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by UWM Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and Dissertations by an
authorized administrator of UWM Digital Commons. For more information, please contact open-access@uwm.edu.
Recommended Citation
Coffey, Cassandra, "Creating Inclusive Experiences in Children's Museums for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder" (2018).
Theses and Dissertations. 1981.
https://dc.uwm.edu/etd/1981

CREATING INCLUSIVE EXPERIENCES IN CHILDREN’S MUSEUMS FOR CHILDREN 
WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER 
 
by 
 
Cassandra Sue Coffey 
 
A Thesis Submitted in 
Partial Fulfillment of the 
Requirements for the Degree of 
 
Master of Science 
in Anthropology 
at 
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
December 2018 
 
 
 

ii 
 
ABSTRACT 
CREATING INCLUSIVE EXPERIENCES IN CHILDREN’S MUSEUMS FOR CHILDREN 
WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER 
 
by 
 
Cassandra Coffey 
 
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2018 
Under the Supervision of Professor W. Warner Wood 
 
This study examined daily programming and inclusion efforts for children with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) at a singular study site, a children’s museum located 
in a suburban community of Illinois. The purpose of this study was to identify, through 
survey, observation, and peer interviews the current accessibility barriers at the study 
site and suggest ways to prevent them through inclusive design strategies. Interviews 
with children’s museums around the country focused on how children’s museums may 
be able to expand their inclusion efforts to overcome these barriers including designing 
programming to provide inclusive experiences for children with ASD. These interviews 
championed the use of a variety of inclusion efforts including utilizing Universal Design 
for Learning Guidelines in program development and engaging community partners. 
Survey results showed that visitors to the site utilized these environments for leisure 
and supplementary educational opportunities. However, due to various barriers related 
to the Museum environment and characteristics of ASD, children with the disorder are 
not always able to have a positive experience. Observations conducted at the study site 
revealed that while the Museum offers many accessibility resources to visitors, its 
current daily programming is unsupportive of a neurodiverse audience. Outcomes from 
this study resulted in recommendations to improve the experiences of children with ASD 

iii 
 
at the study site by investing in staff training and resources, designing programs that 
comply with Universal Design for Learning Guidelines, and cultivating and maintaining 
community partnerships. In addition, strategies for measuring the effectiveness of these 
recommendations were identified. This, in turn, may be relevant and beneficial to ASD 
programming development and delivery at other museum sites around the country.  
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright by Cassandra Sue Coffey, 2018 
All Rights Reserved 
 
 

v 
 
DEDICATION 
 
There are many people that have helped me throughout this process and I am so 
grateful for the support and guidance they have given me. First, I want to thank all of the 
museum professionals, teachers, therapists, and caregivers that devoted time to this 
project. I appreciate those who welcomed me into their play time and those who took 
time out of their busy schedules to provide reflections on their experiences. I would like 
to thank the staff at the study site for their willingness to participate in this project and 
their helpful insights. I would like to thank the members of my committee, Dr. W. Warner 
Wood, Dawn Scher Thomae, and Dr. Laura Owens for their mentorship, guidance, and 
patience throughout this process and my graduate school experience.  
 
I am incredibly grateful to my family and friends that supported me throughout 
graduate school. I would especially like to thank my parents, Larry and Vicki and my 
sister, Shelby for supporting my love of learning about culture and museums and 
inspiring me with their hard work and dedication to their own passions. Thank you for 
always being there for me and encouraging me to accomplish my goals. Most of all, 
thank you to my husband Pete, for his unwavering love and support. Thank you for 
keeping my study snacks in full supply, encouraging me to overcome difficult 
experiences along the way, and making me believe I was smart enough and strong 
enough to achieve my dreams.  
 
 
 

vi 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
List of Figures ................................................................................................................ viii 
Chapter 1: Introduction .................................................................................................... 1  
Chapter 2: Contextualizing Inclusion Efforts for Children with ASD ................................ 8 
Movement Towards Accessibility and Inclusion.................................................... 8 
Understanding Your Audience: Autism Spectrum Disorder ................................ 13 
Identifying Barriers .............................................................................................. 16 
Influence of Informal Learning Environments ..................................................... 19 
Chapter 3: Methodology and Institutional Setting .......................................................... 29 
 
Introduction ......................................................................................................... 29 
Study Site ........................................................................................................... 32 
Chapter 4: Peer Museum Interviews ............................................................................. 50 
 
Introduction ......................................................................................................... 50 
 
Findings .............................................................................................................. 50 
Chapter 5: Survey ......................................................................................................... 75 
 
Introduction ......................................................................................................... 75 
Protocol .............................................................................................................. 75 
Results ............................................................................................................... 77 
Chapter 6: Observation ................................................................................................. 84 
Introduction ......................................................................................................... 84 
Protocol .............................................................................................................. 87 
Findings .............................................................................................................. 88 
Chapter 7: Discussion ................................................................................................. 105 
 
Introduction ....................................................................................................... 105 
 
Recommendations for Daily Programming ....................................................... 114 
 
Measuring the Effectiveness of Recommendations and Inclusion Strategies ... 121 
Chapter 8: Conclusion ................................................................................................. 125 
References .................................................................................................................. 128 
Appendices ................................................................................................................. 137 
 
Appendix A: Overview of Education and Programs Staff .................................. 137 

vii 
 
 
Appendix B: Peer Museum Interview Questions............................................... 143 
 
Appendix C: Survey Participant Recruitment Flyer ........................................... 145 
 
Appendix D: Survey Participant Sign-Up Form ................................................. 146 
 
Appendix E: Accessibility & Inclusion Survey Consent Form ........................... 147 
 
Appendix F: Accessibility & Inclusion Survey Questions .................................. 148 
 
Appendix G: Observation Worksheet ............................................................... 151 
 
Appendix H: Observation Informational Flyer ................................................... 152  
 
Appendix I: Daily Programming Sample  .......................................................... 153 
 
Appendix J: Daily Programming Sample 2 ....................................................... 155 
 
  
 
 
 

viii 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 2.1: Universal Design for Learning Guidelines ................................................... 27 
Figure 3.1: Study Site Organizational Chart .................................................................. 36 
Figure 3.2: Resources at Accessibility Events ............................................................... 46 
Figure 6.1: Gallery Space .............................................................................................. 89 
Figure 6.2: Unit Block Area ........................................................................................... 93 
Figure 6.3: Art Studio .................................................................................................... 97 
Figure 6.4: Sensory Story & Play Time ....................................................................... 100 
Figure 6.5: Visual Schedule Board .............................................................................. 101 

1 
 
Chapter 1: INTRODUCTION 
Museums have the potential to influence an individual’s learning throughout 
every stage of life (AAM 2008). Today, children’s museums are becoming increasingly 
relevant as institutions of informal learning for children under 10 years of age. These 
institutions provide children and their caregivers an open environment where they can 
interact with a plethora of subject matter and materials in numerous ways (Jeffery-Clay 
1998). Children’s museums are also open-ended, hands-on, sensory rich institutions 
that can support a variety of different learning styles. Therefore, they have the potential 
to be inclusive learning environments for a neurodiverse audience. This unique learning 
environment exists in many children’s museums and can offer a wealth of informal 
learning opportunities to young visitors, including those with Autism Spectrum Disorder 
(ASD). 
This thesis focuses on children with ASD and their experiences in children’s 
museums. Children with ASD represent a growing audience for children’s museums that 
may benefit from their hands-on, open-ended learning environments. However, children 
with ASD may be prevented from these learning opportunities due to factors that 
influence their visit, like overwhelming crowds or unsupportive facilitation.  As the 
potential audience for informal learning opportunities grows--so does the importance of 
transforming children’s museums into inclusive institutions that are designed for 
everyone. To support children with ASD, museums currently recognize that these 
visitors have diverse learning needs that necessitate the implementation of a broad 
variety of educational strategies, resources, and environmental modifications. This 
commitment to providing an inclusive educational environment in museums aligns with 

2 
 
the view of inclusion in formal education settings; that all individuals should be a part of 
the general education community (Pratt 1997).  In response to this growing audience, 
many institutions have developed and implemented strategies such as sensory kits, 
special hours, accessibility events, and staff disability awareness training in hopes to 
improve the museum experience for individuals with ASD. These efforts are relevant, 
but are we really offering and supporting an equitable and inclusive experience for 
children with ASD? I think the answer for many institutions is “not yet,” and the findings 
of this study support such a conclusion. 
In their most recent report, Facing Change: Insights from AAM’s DEAI (Diversity, 
Equity, Accessibility, and Inclusion) Working Group, the American Alliance of Museums 
(AAM) echoed a similar concern about the status of inclusion in museums. “While we 
acknowledge and respect our predecessors’ efforts, reviewing AAM’s history around 
Disability, Equity, Accessibility, and Inclusion led to several questions, particularly as we 
discovered that multiple past plans had featured similar sets of recommendations. The 
biggest of our questions: Why haven’t we seen more change (2018)?”  
Also, as a part of this recent report, the DEAI Working Group produced a set of 
definitions for Diversity, Equity, Accessibility, and Inclusion:  
• Diversity – Diversity is all the ways that people are different and the same at 
the individual and group levels. Even when people appear the same, they are 
different. 
• Equity – Equity is the fair and just treatment of all members of a community.  
• Accessibility – Accessibility is giving equitable access to everyone along the 
continuum of human ability and experiences. 
• Inclusion – Inclusion refers to the intentional, ongoing effort to ensure that 
diverse individuals fully participate in all aspects of organizational work, 
including decision-making processes. (AAM 2018) 
 

3 
 
“Inclusion” is a trendy term found on museum websites, particularly within mission, 
vision, and value statements, and strategic plans that relate to exhibits and programs. It 
is vital to recognize that conversations regarding inclusion in museums are not solely 
related to the experiences of individuals with disabilities. Individuals with disabilities are 
just one example of the many, long and diverse struggles for equity and inclusion that 
exist in the museum field. Museum inclusion efforts refer to a much larger conversation 
that expands across the museum field and pertains to all “who have historically been 
relegated to the margins of society due to legacies of racism, ableism, sexism, 
heterosexism, xenophobia, and all other forms of injustice” (AAM 2017). Currently, 
many museums are striving towards creating more inclusive environments for 
audiences who have historically been underrepresented or marginalized. Individuals 
with disabilities represent one of the audiences where there is still room to expand these 
efforts (Deng 2015).  
Historically, individuals with disabilities have belonged to this underserved 
audience.  As reported by the American Alliance of Museums (AAM) (2015), individuals 
with disabilities represent the largest minority group in the United States today, 
comprising approximately 56 million Americans. The Institute on Disability reported that 
in 2015, 7.2% of individuals with disabilities in the United States were children between 
5-17 years old, and children under 5 represented 0.4% of the total number of individuals 
(Kraus 2017). Supporting more inclusive museum experiences for individuals with 
disabilities is mutually beneficial for visitors and the institution. One in five people in the 
United States have some type of disability (in other words, 20% of the population), and 
when combined with their family members, friends, and companions, this becomes a 

4 
 
huge potential museum audience and significant proportion of the population (AAM 
2015).  
Based on the disability rights legislation of the 1960s-2010s, museums have 
made improvements to their physical environment that make them more accessible to 
individuals with physical disabilities. However, the meaning of the term “accessibility” 
has broadened over time including an increased understanding about neurodiversity, 
influencing museums to expand their efforts to ensure access for individuals with 
developmental and intellectual disabilities as well. It is recognized that accessibility is an 
organizational commitment that can create a larger, more diverse audience for 
museums to welcome into their institutions. “Accessibility begins as a mandate to serve 
people who have been discriminated against for centuries; it prevails as a tool that 
serves diverse audiences for a lifetime (Majewski 1996).”  
This study focuses on inclusion for children with ASD as the ongoing effort to 
ensure these individuals can experience the learning opportunities available in 
children’s museums, to use design strategies which make their programs and exhibits 
supportive of a diverse audience, and to collaborate with this audience and listen to 
what they need and want. Inclusion is a created environment where people feel 
supported, listened to, and able to do their personal best (AAM 2014). Providing an 
equitable and inclusive experience for all is essential for the sustainability and relevancy 
of museums (AAM 2008).  
If children’s museums dedicate time and funding to make their programs and 
exhibits more inclusive for children with ASD, they will end up creating a more 
welcoming and effective learning environment for everyone. Therefore, the purpose of 

5 
 
this study was to identify, through peer museum interviews, survey, and observation the 
current barriers at a particular study site and to suggest ways to overcome them in order 
to be supportive of an inclusive experience for children with ASD. Research and 
methods focused on three main questions: 
1. What are the current barriers to children with ASD when visiting a children’s 
museum?  
 
2. How should a museum invest their time and resources (including human 
resources) to improve inclusion efforts?  
 
3. How can programming within a children’s museum be designed and 
implemented to provide an inclusive experience for children with ASD?  
 
This study focused on a singular study site, a children’s museum located in a suburban 
community of Illinois referred to throughout this study as “the Museum.”. The Museum 
serves as an example of an institution that is striving to create more equitable 
experiences for visitors with ASD, but is falling short regarding their commitment to time, 
design strategies, and the dedicated efforts necessary to move towards more inclusion 
for child visitors with ASD. This thesis is organized in the following manner:  
The second chapter, Contextualizing Inclusion Efforts for Children with ASD, 
discusses various factors that impact the discussion of inclusion in children’s museums 
for this audience. The section entitled Movement Towards Accessibility and Inclusion 
includes an overview of the legislation that led to the current discussions of inclusion in 
the museum field. Understanding Your Audience: Autism Spectrum Disorder discusses 
the characteristics and prevalence of ASD. The section entitled Identifying Barriers 
gives an overview of the barriers that may be present in a children’s museum 
environment for individuals with ASD. Finally, Influence of Informal Learning 

6 
 
Environments will focus on the learning opportunities in children’s museums in relation 
to the Contextual Model of Learning, Constructivism, Universal Design, and Universal 
Design for Learning.  
The third chapter, Methodology and Institutional Setting, discusses the purpose 
of the study and the various methods utilized including: peer museum interviews, 
survey, and observation. This chapter provides an overview of the Study Site including 
Museum Staff, Facilitation Staff Training, a History of Daily Programming at the 
Museum, and their Current Accessibility Efforts for Children with ASD. 
In the fourth chapter, Peer Museum Interviews, discussion focuses on interviews 
that were conducted with staff members of a group of children’s museums from across 
the United States. Staff from these institutions were interviewed to identify shared 
barriers; with the hopes of developing some helpful insights and effective practices that 
museums can engage in to move further towards inclusion. Staff from the following 
institutions were interviewed: ¡Explora!, Kohl Children’s Museum, Wow! Children’s 
Museum, Sciencenter, Iowa Children’s Museum, The Peoria Playhouse Children’s 
Museum, Portland Children’s Museum, and Madison Children’s Museum. 
The fifth chapter of this thesis, Survey, presents the findings of an Accessibility 
and Inclusion Survey that was conducted with visitors in order to assess the Museum’s 
current inclusion efforts and identify barriers that exist in at the study site for children 
with ASD. Survey participants included caregivers, teachers, and therapists of children 
with ASD.  
The sixth chapter of this thesis, Observations, turns to observational with an eye 
toward identifying strategies for improvement in daily programming that would support a 

7 
 
more neurodiverse audience at the Museum on a consistent basis. The observed 
programs included: Storytime, Music Time, Block Building, an Art Studio, and Sensory 
Story & Play Time.  
The seventh chapter of this thesis, Discussion, pulls together the findings from 
the three methodologies of this study and discusses how they impact the contexts of a 
learning environment: personal, social, and physical (Falk and Dierking, 1992). In 
addition, recommendations are made for improvements to the Museum’s daily and 
special programming that will make experiences at the Museum more inclusive to a 
neurodiverse audience. It is recommended that the Museum invest time and funding to 
properly train their staff to work with diverse audiences and to develop resources for use 
for children with ASD. In addition, it is recommended that they design programs utilizing 
UDL to support a neurodiverse audience including those with ASD. Finally, the Museum 
should continue to cultivate and maintain relationships with partners in their community 
that work with this specialized audience. This chapter includes specific ways that the 
Museum can measure the aforementioned recommendations and inclusion strategies 
including surveying facilitation staff about daily programming, having supervisors 
observe and evaluate daily programs, conducting daily program surveys with visitors, 
and having community partners observe and evaluate daily programs specifically in 
regard to children with ASD. 
The eighth chapter, Conclusion, summarizes the findings of the study methods, 
the recommended ways for the Museum to improve daily programming, and the 
proposed ways to measure the effectiveness of recommendations and inclusion 
strategies.  

8 
 
Chapter 2: CONTEXTUALIZING INCLUSION EFFORTS FOR CHILDREN WITH ASD 
Movement Towards Accessibility and Inclusion 
In the National Endowment for the Arts Design for Accessibility: A Cultural 
Administrator's Handbook (2003), the authors identify the difference between 
accessibility and inclusion as the difference between a means and an overall goal, 
“Remember that accessibility is only one means to a larger goal--inclusion in the cultural 
community of people of all ages, with and without disabilities.” Providing physical 
access to an experience or space is just one factor of what it means to have an 
inclusive or equitable experience. The movement towards accessibility in museums for 
individuals with disabilities began as one framed around compliance with federal 
regulations regarding physical access; it continues today as conversations deepen 
about what it means to provide an equitable experience for all.  
The foundation for the movement towards accessibility in museums began with 
the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (ABA). The ABA requires access to facilities 
designed, built, altered, or leased with federal funds after August 12, 1968. Facilities 
such as United States post offices, national parks, social security administration offices, 
U.S. courthouses, schools receiving federal funding, public housing, and mass transit 
systems. The ABA is enforced through standards for accessible design which are 
regulated by the Department for Defense, Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, General Services Administration, and the U.S. Postal Service. These 
design standards indicate where access is required and provide detailed specifications 
for the design of building elements such as ramps, parking, doors, restrooms, etc. 

9 
 
These requirements do not address the activities conducted in these facilities (United 
States Access Board 2018).  
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 continued to build on this movement. The 
Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in programs 
conducted by federal agencies, in programs receiving federal financial assistance, in 
federal employment, and in the employment practices of federal contractors. This 
pertains to the museum field because Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act covers 
institutions that receive federal funding from federal grant making agencies such as the 
National Science Foundation, National Endowment for the Arts, National Endowment for 
the Humanities (ASTC 2018), and the Institute of Museum and Library Services. In 
addition, Section 508 requires federal agencies’ information and communications 
technology to be accessible to people with disabilities. Even though Section 508 only 
applies to federal agencies, many other institutions have adapted these standards to 
ensure their technology infrastructure is accessible (Art Beyond Sight 2014).  
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 marked a considerable 
expansion on the laws prohibiting discrimination against individuals with disabilities. The 
ADA defines someone with a disability as a person with a physical or mental impairment 
that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a person who has a history or 
record of such an impairment, or a person who is perceived by others as having such 
an impairment. (U.S. Department of Justice 2009). The federal civil rights law 
guarantees equal opportunity for individuals with disabilities in employment, public 
accommodations, transportation, state and local government services, and 
telecommunications by requiring businesses of all sizes that serve the public to remove 

10 
 
existing barriers, ensure accessibility in new and remodeled facilities, and to support 
effective communication through auxiliary aids. Specifically, Titles II & III of the ADA 
requires businesses to follow specific architectural standards for new and altered 
buildings, provide auxiliary aids when necessary to ensure effective communication, 
and support the relocation of previously inaccessible programs. Title II applies to those 
operated by state or local governments and Title III applies to privately-owned 
businesses and nonprofits. Museums (except for the Smithsonian Institution) fall into 
one of these two categories. Per the ADA, these businesses must make reasonable 
modifications in order to ensure that their facilities, goods, and services are accessible 
to people with disabilities, as long as these modifications are without undue financial 
and administrative burden (ASTC 2018). In 2010, the revised ADA Standards for 
Accessible Design were adopted with updated requirements for newly designed and 
constructed or altered state and local government facilities, public accommodations, 
and commercial facilities.  
Since the 1970s, many museums have made improvements to the accessibility 
of their buildings and programs for visitors with disabilities (U.S. Department of Justice 
2009). These efforts are guided by the ongoing discussion of accessibility and inclusion 
in two of the largest leading museum organizations in the United States: The 
Association of Children’s Museums (ACM) and the American Alliance of Museums 
(AAM). Founded in 1962, the ACM serves as a professional member service 
organization for more than 400 members in the children’s museum field (ACM 2018). 
According to their Diversity Statement, ACM believes that children’s museums have 
qualities that make them prime champions of diversity and inclusion. Children’s 

11 
 
museums are leaders in developing inclusive experiences through their exhibits, 
educational programs, advocacy work, and community relationships that reflect their 
diverse communities (ACM 2018).   
Since 1906, the American Alliance of Museums has guided the museum field by 
developing standards for best practices, serving as a professional networking platform, 
driving research, and providing standards-based assessment programs. In 1991, AAM 
published their report Excellence and Equity, which advocates for museums to change 
their view of how they serve society; it introduces inclusion as the respect and reflection 
of the nation’s diversity within museum operations and programs and highlights the 
educational role of museums as a core part of their public service (AAM 2008). 
“Museums should be more welcoming places for all people regardless of their age, 
ability, education, class, race, or ethnic origin. We must make a concerted long-term 
effort to become involved with our communities and to inaugurate programs that are 
responsive to the needs and wishes of our potential constituents (Ibid:17).” Within this 
report, AAM set standards for the continued improvement of the field’s impact on 
society. Some of these goals are especially relevant to the relationship of museums to 
individuals with disabilities:  
● Develop and expand research methods that will test and document how people 
learn in the museum environment. Apply the findings to exhibition and program 
development.  
● Develop educational experiences for school children, families, and adults that 
reflect a knowledge of the different learning styles visitors bring to museums.  
● Experiment with exhibition and program strategies and innovative technologies to 
enhance the capacity of museums to reach a wider audience through exhibitions 
and programs. (Ibid:19) 
 

12 
 
In addition, a recommendation was made for museums to reach out to audiences with 
special needs and collaborate with them to ensure museum programs, exhibits, 
services, and information are accessible to these audiences (Ibid). 
Since setting the stage for inclusion in Excellence and Equity, the American 
Alliance of Museums has:  
● Included diversity and inclusion in several of its strategic plans 
● Convened external task forces to develop action plans for the field 
● Created internal inclusion teams 
● Hired staff members devoted to addressing DEAI 
● Issued a national diversity statement with affiliate organizations 
● Worked to integrate DEAI into museum excellence programs 
● Published numerous related articles, fact sheets, toolkits, and other resources 
(AAM 2018) 
 
In 2014, the American Alliance of Museums continued their drive for inclusion with the 
issuing of their Diversity and Inclusion Policy Statement. This statement was made to 
support the transformation of “diversity and inclusion from a special initiative to an 
institution-wide business practice (Art Beyond Sight 2014).” The Diversity and Inclusion 
Policy Statement reads:  
The American Alliance of Museums respects, values and celebrates the unique 
attributes, characteristics and perspectives that make each person who they are. 
We believe that our strength lies in our diversity among the broad range of 
people and museums we represent. We consider diversity and inclusion a driver 
of institutional excellence and seek out diversity of participation, thought and 
action. It is our aim, therefore, that our members, partners, and key stakeholders 
reflect and embrace these core values. (AAM 2014) 
 
In their most recent strategic plan, AAM calls for diversity, equity, accessibility, and 
inclusion to be integral to museums’ structure and programs as they are essential 
components of museums’ service to society (AAM 2016). In the Spring of 2017, AAM 
organized the Working Group on Diversity, Equity, Accessibility, and Inclusion (DEAI). 

13 
 
This group was comprised of 20 museum professionals who represented a variety of 
perspectives, organizational sizes, and disciplines, including Laura Huerta Migus, 
Executive Director of the Association of Children’s Museums. Together, the group 
examined current inclusion efforts and suggested what position the field could take to 
support DEAI. This evaluation resulted in the report Facing Change: Insights from 
AAM’s DEAI Working Group (AAM 2018). From this report, AAM (2018) produced five 
insights about what is necessary to support effective DEAI efforts in museums: 
1. Every museum professional must do personal work to face their unconscious 
bias 
2. Debate on definitions must not hinder progress 
3. Inclusion is central to the effectiveness and sustainability of museums 
4. Systemic change is vital to long-term, genuine progress 
5. Empowered, inclusive leadership is essential at all levels of an organization 
 
These insights are imperative for museums to pursue and at the same time they 
generally reiterate the organization's previous statements about inclusion. In addition, 
while some of these statements are potentially measurable, AAM does not provide any 
specific metrics to understand what constitutes successful inclusion. Systemic response 
to this pressing issue will remain unrealized without the recommendation of measurable 
strategies to implement within the museum environment. In order, to create more 
inclusive experiences for individuals with ASD, it is vital to understand this audience, 
their needs, and what barriers exist for them within a children’s museum environment.  
Understanding Your Audience: Autism Spectrum Disorder 
It is estimated that 1 in 59 children in the United States have been identified with 
ASD (CDC 2018). ASD is a range of developmental disabilities that can cause 
significant social, communication, and behavioral challenges. Individuals with ASD 
experience deficits in communication and social interaction, and restrictive, repetitive 

14 
 
behavioral patterns. Socially, individuals may have difficulty reciprocating emotionally 
and developing/understanding relationships. They may have difficulty communicating 
both verbally and nonverbally. Individuals with ASD may also exhibit an inflexible 
adherence to routine, extreme fixation on specific subjects, and sensory processing 
difficulties. (American Psychiatric Association 2013; Greenspan and Wieder 2006) Over 
the past few decades, the number of ASD diagnoses has grown exponentially due to 
the broadening of diagnostic criteria and increased awareness due to an expanded 
effort to research a historically misunderstood and misrepresented condition (Wing 
2005; Wolff 2004).  
The first clinical account of autism, “Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact,” 
was published in 1943 by Leo Kanner in the journal The Nervous Child. He 
characterized the eleven children in this report as having a lack of interest in social 
interactions, repetitive behaviors, and a resistance to change or insistence on 
sameness. Kanner viewed autism as a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder that he 
separated from other known genetic syndromes, brain injuries, and severe intellectual 
disabilities (Kanner 1943). Even though Kanner saw autism as distinct from 
schizophrenia, during this time period cases like these were considered forms of 
childhood schizophrenia (infantile psychosis). Over the next few decades, the 
understanding of the characteristics of autism expanded to include difficulties with social 
development and communication skills, resistance to diverging from a familiar routine, 
repetitive movements or behaviors, and an onset of symptoms in early childhood 
(Volkmar and Reichow 2013). In 1980, autism was introduced as a new condition in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition (DSM-III). It was 

15 
 
categorized under the generic term “pervasive developmental disorder” (PDD), which 
disassociated it from childhood-onset schizophrenia (Harris 2016). Between DSM-III 
and the publication of DSM-IV, research of the period attempted to understand the 
range of the disorder and how age and IQ range influenced diagnosis. A sub-category 
of PDD, known as pervasive developmental disorders not otherwise specified (PDD-
NOS) was created and three new disorders were recognized in DSM-IV including 
childhood disintegrative disorder, Asperger’s disorder, and Rett’s disorder.  
In 2013, the American Psychiatric Association published DSM-V which removed 
the subdiagnoses in favor of a single term: autism spectrum disorder. Characteristics of 
the disorder included social reciprocity, communicative intent, and restricted and 
repetitive behaviors. Diagnoses would now be based on characteristics under two areas 
of diagnostic criteria: social communication/interaction and restricted and repetitive 
behaviors. An individual’s symptoms must cause functional impairment for a diagnosis 
of ASD (Hyman 2013). ASD is a “spectrum” disorder as it presents itself differently 
among individuals. ASD is approximately 4.5 times more common in males than 
females (1 in 42 males; 1 in 189 females). The disorder presents itself before age 3, 
with some children exhibiting characteristics within the first few months of life. (CDC 
2017) ASD is non-discriminatory, occurring in all racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic 
groups. The condition ranges from mild to very severe, with individuals varying widely in 
their abilities, intelligence and behaviors (Langa et al. 2013).  
Autism is a complex, life-long condition. Affected individuals may experience 
extreme difficulty engaging appropriately in their environment, maintaining 
environmental awareness, and handling changes that occur in their environment (Shore 

16 
 
2001). Individuals with ASD may experience sensory processing difficulties, including 
hyper- and hyposensitivity to sensory stimuli in their environment. In other words, 
people with ASD have difficulty registering, processing, organizing and reacting 
appropriately to sensory information that arises from their environment (Chistol et al. 
2018). Sensory information may include loud noises, strong smells, bright lights, certain 
foods, and textures. Due to the “sensory distortions” individuals with autism may 
experience, learning environments can often be overwhelming and confusing (Shore 
2001). Sensory overload is just one example of a barrier found in children’s museums 
for individuals with ASD.  
Identifying Barriers 
The children’s museum environment will likely present issues related to all three 
core areas of ASD characteristics, including: social-interaction difficulties, 
communication challenges, and a tendency to engage in repetitive behaviors (Autism 
Speaks 2017). Providing more inclusive environments that support play and informal 
learning for children with ASD is important because of the barriers these individuals may 
face related to the nature and frequency of play opportunities. The term “barriers” is 
used here instead of “challenges” because while some factors of a learning environment 
present challenges for neurotypical individuals, these same factors may prevent or 
discourage a child with ASD from participating at all. For example, children with ASD 
may spend a greater amount of time devoted to self-care, therapy, and educational 
remediation. Many institutions may have limited hours of operation at times that may not 
be suitable for children with a busy weekly schedule. In addition, the potentially busy or 
crowded environment of a children’s museum, especially on weekends, may be 

17 
 
overwhelming for a visitor with ASD. In response, some museums have designed and 
implemented special accessibility hours or events for children with disabilities and their 
families. While parents may enjoy these special events for their fewer crowds and less 
stress, they still desire full inclusion for their children. Currently, many feel their options 
are limited to segregated programs (Kulik and Fletcher 2016).  
In addition to logistical barriers, environmental barriers can impact a child’s 
access to play spaces and opportunities (Rodger and Ziviani 1999; Langa et al. 2013). 
Children with ASD may be impacted by the amount of sensory information in a museum 
environment, such as lights, sounds, smells, or touch (Ideishi et al. 2013). The colorful, 
bright environments and exhibits that may stimulate learning for some individuals—may 
also present a distracting, troubling environment for others such as those with ASD. 
Visiting a children’s museum for the first time is often an exciting or stimulating activity 
for children. However, for some individuals with ASD, diverging from a familiar routine 
and visiting new places without proper preparation can also be a concerning barrier. For 
caregivers, a child’s unpredictable behavior in a public place, especially those that are 
unfamiliar, can be a barrier to visiting a children’s museum (Golden and Walsh 2013; 
Langa et al. 2013). Sometimes what appears to be a typical museum visit, may be 
unpredictable and uncomfortable for families with members with ASD as the risk of 
judgement and criticism from other visitors or staff is always present (Kulik and Fletcher 
2016). Children with ASD may not be identifiable to museum staff, volunteers, and other 
visitors, because of a lack of understanding and training related to the disorder (Kulik 
and Fletcher 2016). Therefore, families with ASD members who are having a negative 
experience can be misunderstood as a child behaving badly or a case of bad parenting. 

18 
 
This lack of understanding creates a barrier to providing a stress-free, welcoming 
environment for individuals with ASD and their families.  
Finally, children with ASD may experience barriers in children’s museums 
because of the highly social nature of these environments. Children with ASD have 
persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction. They may have 
difficulties interacting with their peers, expressing their needs and wants, sharing in 
imaginative play opportunities, and adjusting their behavior in an unfamiliar environment 
(American Psychiatric Association 2013).  
The prevalence of ASD in children today makes it vital for museums to advance 
their inclusion efforts and support this prospective audience:  
With 1.1% of children in the United States diagnosed with autism spectrum 
disorder, understanding how children with ASD and their families experience the 
museum can help broaden our ability to serve them, as well as, provide the right 
types of technological adaptations that help them learn inside the museum. 
(Langa et al. 2013) 
 
Every child has a unique personal context and experiences a children’s museum 
environment in a different way. If museums focus only on the characteristics of a 
disorder to create a seemingly inclusive environment, they will fall short in supporting 
their diverse audience. Creating and supporting meaningful experiences for all visitors 
should be the goal of museums as learning institutions. Instead of creating separate 
experiences or objectives for children with disabilities; the goal should be finding ways 
to integrate practices that benefit all children and improve the program quality for every 
child (Buysse 2011). High-quality inclusion means removing physical or structural 
barriers and providing multiple ways to support learning and development; championing 
a sense of belonging through participatory play and learning activities; and ensuring a 

19 
 
strong foundation through collaboration with key partners and investment in staff 
responsible for implementing inclusive programs (DEC/NAEYC 2009). Many institutions 
have been striving to create accessible, inclusive experiences for their visitors—and still 
have not made a deep enough commitment to their educational role (AAM 2008). While 
many museums have tried to understand their visitors and how they influence the 
museum experience, it is vital that institutions study themselves to understand what 
aspects of their exhibits, programs, and staff impact this experience. The unique 
learning environment that exists in many children’s museums can offer a wealth of 
informal learning opportunities to young visitors, including those with ASD.  
Influence of Informal Learning Environments  
Today, children’s museums, as well as other types of museums, are becoming 
increasingly relevant as institutions of informal learning. Schools, community 
organizations, and families utilize these environments for leisure and supplementary 
educational opportunities. Children spend a significant portion of their time outside of 
classrooms and daycare. On average, children under age 13 spend approximately 26 
hours per week in formal education settings (Hofferth and Sandberg 2001). Therefore, a 
large portion of their time spent learning is in informal environments. Children’s 
museums may appear primarily to many as a place for leisure, but play has a significant 
impact on children’s learning. Children learn through play, which often occurs outside of 
formal education settings (Hofferth and Sandberg 2001). In recent years, research has 
explored the potential benefits of utilizing children’s museums as a supplement to 
classroom curriculum. According to Henderson and Atencio (2007: 248), “[inquiry-based 
museums] provide teachers with a means to extend children’s learning beyond what 

20 
 
occurs in the classroom and provides teachers with many opportunities to engage 
children in collaborative, dialogical, and self-directed explorations that are a core feature 
of play-based learning.”  
In her study of children’s museums as supplementary learning environments, 
Rapp (2005) discovered that the inquiry-based children’s museum appealed to both 
children with exceptional learning needs and those without. While exploring the 
museum’s exhibits, students classified as having a disability could not be distinguished 
from typical students based on their behavior and performance in the museum. Rudy 
(2004), recognized that children’s museums employ multisensory approaches to 
education that are beneficial for a wide range of individuals regardless of their perceived 
differences. This type of approach is effective because of the many factors that can 
influence the efficacy and quality of a learning environment.  
Contextual Model of Learning  
Falk and Dierking (1992) identify three contexts that interact to form a museum 
visit: personal, social, and physical, this theory is known as the Contextual Model of 
Learning. Each of these contexts intersect in a learning environment and affect an 
individual’s experience. The personal context is an individual’s experiences and 
knowledge; it includes their interests, motivations, and concerns. This is the context the 
visitor brings into the museum. It is vital for museum educators to understand and 
acknowledge that each visitor brings a unique perspective and knowledge to a learning 
situation (CAST 2018). Personal context serves as the basis for how an individual 
experiences a museum’s exhibits, its programs, and how individuals build upon their 
existing knowledge. The personal context also refers to an individual’s learning style or 

21 
 
method of perceiving (Maxwell and Evans 2002). The social context is whomever a 
visitor encounters inside the museum (visitors, family members, friends, volunteers, 
staff members, etc.). Facilitation from museum staff and volunteers to visitors is also a 
part of the social context. The physical context is the museum itself—the building, 
objects, environment—what is to be explored and experienced by the visitor. The 
unique and complex environments of museums are a significant determinant in the 
potential for learning, and extremely influential to the overall museum experience of 
individuals with ASD. For example, museums [especially children’s museums] may 
have many competing environmental factors, including lighting, noise, and colors 
(Maxwell and Evans 2002). These factors can cause sensory overload for an individual 
with sensory processing issues.  
The social context and physical context of a museum learning environment can 
be influenced the educational theory or pedagogy that determines the design of a 
museum’s programs and exhibits. Many children’s museums, like the site for this study, 
create and implement programming and exhibits following the pedagogical tenets of 
Constructivism.  
Constructivism 
Constructivism is an educational theory which postulates that individuals are 
creators of their own knowledge; they encounter new information, assess it against 
previous knowledge or experiences, and then build on their understanding most often 
with the help of others. A museum environment (in both the physical and social sense) 
can help visitors to build connections to their pre-existing knowledge by providing 
opportunities for them to link what they already know to new concepts explored in a 

22 
 
museum exhibits, objects, programs, etc. When visitors make these links, their learning 
is enhanced (Jeffery-Clay 1998). Forman and Hill describe constructive play as a cycle: 
Constructive play…builds on itself to increase the competence of the child. This 
competence, in turn, increases the child’s pleasure by making even more 
creative acts possible. The cycle repeats itself, with the new creative acts 
becoming yet another form of play at a higher level of understanding until they 
are mastered. (1984)  
 
Constructivist children’s museums focus on providing exhibits and programming that 
support open-ended, discovery-based learning; championed by the belief that children 
learn by doing rather than by observing. Children’s museums encourage children to 
follow their own motivations and curiosity within a supportive physical and social 
environment. This type of free choice learning environment supports their ability to 
construct their own personal understanding (Bamberger and Tal 2007). Children take 
these experiences outside of the museum and continue to build new knowledge. 
According to Hein (2001), there are several practices necessary for museum that 
operate under a constructivist pedagogy. The celebration and encouragement of 
personal meaning making is central to Constructivism. Children’s museums that engage 
in Constructivist pedagogy do not present specific content that children are expected to 
learn. Rather, they provide opportunities and materials that children can interact with 
and develop, test, and build upon their prior knowledge. The emphasis is on process 
rather than content. Furthermore, Constructivist museums refrain from judging visitors’ 
interpretations against standard, academic knowledge.  Successful exhibits and 
programs support an increase in individuals’ willingness to explore, investigate, 
question, and challenge; rather than advancing their ability to master a subject (Hein 
2001).  

23 
 
Children’s museums based in Constructivism may support an adult-child learning 
partnership or collaborative learning opportunities, where this expanded learning and 
problem-solving can thrive. Social constructivists, like Vygotsky (1978), believe that 
children, can learn beyond their actual developmental level through guidance or 
collaboration with adults and/or peers of a more advanced developmental level. 
Children are capable creators of their own values and meanings. Adults and more 
experienced peers help mediate learning and guide the experience (Thompson 2015). 
This type of interaction is known as scaffolding.  
Scaffolding involves a varying level of child autonomy in a learning experience 
combined with the temporary assistance of an adult (who may be a family member, 
caregiver, or museum staff member) or more experienced peer. The adult encourages a 
learner towards a successful learning experience by providing support and guidance 
through a task and gradually reducing the amount of assistance as the child gains 
greater confidence and understanding of the task. They help a learner go from what 
they know to what else they could know. For example: a child and facilitator are playing 
with building blocks. The child is stacking building blocks on top of each other. The 
facilitator gains the child’s attention and begins building the blocks into a bridge 
formation. As they watch the child appropriate this skill, the facilitator may ask open-
ended questions about other ways they could construct the bridge together. Once this 
formation is modeled confidently by the child or the child loses interest, the facilitator 
may move onto a different construction.  
 
Children’s museum exhibits and programs are often designed to support 
scaffolding experiences; presenting opportunities within a single exhibit for a caregiver 

24 
 
or facilitator to build on a child’s knowledge as it grows. Scaffolding is individualized to 
the needs of each child; therefore, it is often improvised and somewhat subtle between 
facilitators and children in informal learning environments like children’s museums. 
Research has been conducted on the importance and benefits of child-adult/peer 
interactivity in children’s museums (Benjamin et al. 2010; Andre et al. 2017; Foutz and 
Emmons 2017). Findings have shown that supporting exhibits with facilitation strategies 
and hands-on activities can help children build skills in understanding, concept 
knowledge, teamwork, communication, group communication, and critical thinking 
(Andre et al. 2017).  
While it is necessary to provide individuals with the resources they need to 
succeed in informal learning environments (Bovee 2000), a museum’s programs and 
exhibits should be designed in a way that supports an effective learning environment for 
everyone (Matthews 2009). An effective learning environment is unique for every 
individual. Each child brings their own conceptual structure into an experience, interacts 
with others in a unique way, and is influenced differently by the physical environment. 
To fully support their audience, museums should ensure they are developing exhibits 
and programs that are inclusive of a variety of different learning styles and ability levels. 
They must seek to understand the varied motivations of their audience, support social 
interaction and cooperative play, and craft a setting that dissolves the potential physical 
barriers to learning success. To support effective learning environments for a diverse 
audience many museums have designed exhibits according to Universal Design 
standards. To ensure their programs are also inclusive, museums may consider utilizing 
the Universal Design for Learning Guidelines to design and facilitate their programs.  

25 
 
Universal Design 
Universal Design (UD) was developed following the Disability Rights Movement, 
which inspired changing legislation regarding accessibility throughout the 1960s-1990s. 
The challenge of retrofitting and modifying built environments to make them accessible 
to individuals with disabilities prompted architects and designers to develop a method of 
design that anticipated the needs of a diverse audience. The Principles of Universal 
Design were conceived and developed by The Center for Universal Design at North 
Carolina State University. UD is defined as “the design of products and environments to 
be usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without adaptation or 
specialized design (The Center for Universal Design 1997).” The seven principles 
include:   
1. Equitable Use – The design is useful and marketable to people with diverse 
abilities. 
2. Flexibility in Use – The design accommodates a wide range of individual 
preferences and abilities. 
3. Simple and Intuitive Use – Use of the design is easy to understand, 
regardless of the user’s experience, knowledge, language skills, or current 
concentration level.  
4. Perceptible Information – The design communicates necessary information 
effectively to the use, regardless of ambient conditions or the user’s sensory 
abilities. 
5. Tolerance for Error – The design minimizes hazards and the adverse 
consequences of accidental or unintended actions. 
6. Low Physical Effort – The design can be used efficiently and comfortably 
and with a minimum of fatigue.  
7. Size and Space for Approach and Use – Appropriate size and space is 
provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and use regardless of user’s 
body size, posture, or mobility. (The Center for Universal Design 1997) 
 
Curb cuts are a popular example of UD and how this method of design can be beneficial 
for everyone. Curb cuts allow for an individual using a wheelchair to access a sidewalk 
while also supporting easier travel for strollers, bicyclists, and for individuals who may 

26 
 
have difficulty negotiating curbs. While the goal of UD is to remove barriers from the 
physical environment, the goal of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is to eliminate 
barriers in learning environments.  
Universal Design for Learning  
The foundations for UDL began in early civil rights and special education legislation 
and developed out of the UD movement and advancements in architectural design, 
expansions in education technology, and discoveries about how the brain is affected 
during learning (Ralabate 2011). UDL (Figure 2.1) is a researched-based set of 
principles developed by the Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST) in the late 
1990s. UDL principles focus on the “why, what, and how” of learning to guide the design 
of accessible and effective learning environments. It includes multiple strategies to 
stimulate interest and motivation for learning, present information and content in 
different ways, and differentiate the ways that students can express what they know 
(CAST 2018). UDL is a more successful approach to inclusion than assistive technology 
or accessible design because:  
• People often visit museums in neurodiverse social groups like families and school 
groups 
• It allows for individuals with disabilities to learn alongside people without disabilities 
• It enables flexibility and choice with when, what, why, and how individuals decide 
to participate and learn (NISE 2008) 
 
Institutions should invest the time and resources to prepare and educate staff in UDL so 
that their exhibits and programs include all children from the beginning (Lieberman 
2017).  
 
 

27 
 
Figure 2.1: Universal Design for Learning Guidelines (CAST 2018) 

28 
 
The approaches to understanding learning and teaching (pedagogy) reviewed 
here characterize it as an active process wherein individuals rely on their prior 
knowledge and previous experiences to build understanding and make meaning out of 
new situations in both a physical and social sense (Hein 2005). As institutions of 
informal learning, children’s museums offer children an open-ended environment where 
they can engage in hands-on activities; motivated by their own curiosity and creativity. 
These experiences can be further enhanced by the facilitation and guidance of adults 
and more experienced peers. Each experience, learning process, and outcome remains 
unique to the individual. The personal, social, and physical aspects or modes of 
“context” emphasized in the Falk and Dierking approach come together to influence a 
visitor’s experience. The distinctive quality of visitors and what they bring to the 
museum experience and, as a consequence, should each be, in turn, important parts of 
any process of evaluation. The distinctive quality of visitors and what they bring to the 
museum experience necessitates a flexible learning environment. Museums should 
develop their programs and exhibits with a UDL lens, so they can create more 
supportive learning environments for all children. In addition, institutions should ensure 
that their staff and volunteers receive training related to serving a neurodiverse 
audience. Finally, the museum environment, including exhibits and programmatic 
spaces, should be designed from the beginning to support everyone. While providing 
the necessary accessibility resources and supports is important, utilizing inclusive 
design strategies may prevent the need for costly alterations and will make the learning 
environment for effective for all visitors.  
   

29 
 
Chapter 3: METHODOLOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL SETTING 
Introduction 
Three methods were utilized in this study to help determine the current barriers at 
the study site. Results were collated as recommendations, so the study site can explore 
their role as a more inclusive site for children with ASD. Research and methods focused 
on three main questions: 
1. What are the current barriers to children with ASD when visiting a children’s 
museum?  
 
2. How should a museum invest their time and resources (including human 
resources) to improve inclusion efforts?  
 
3. How can programming within a children’s museum be designed and 
implemented to provide an inclusive experience for children with ASD?  
 
This multi-faceted approach included peer interviews, survey, and observation. This 
study utilized these three different methods in order to evaluate museum inclusion for 
children with ASD from multiple viewpoints in an effort to provide a more nuanced 
perspective. For example, peer museum interviews sought museum professionals’ 
perspectives from children’s museums from across the United States that were involved 
in accessibility at their institutions. Findings from the survey reflected the opinions and 
experiences of caregivers, teachers, and therapists that visit the Museum with children 
with ASD. Observations provided a detailed account of the current daily and special 
programming at the Museum and how the environment, quality of interaction and 
facilitation, and content of these programs may impact an individual with ASD. Such an 
multimethodological approach also provides distinctive methods for generating 
measurable data for Falk and Dierking’s approach to understand the context of free 
choice learning.  

30 
 
 Peer Museum Interviews 
Staff members from eight children’s museums from across the United States 
were interviewed to identify shared challenges in providing an inclusive environment for 
children with ASD. The interviewer hoped to gather some helpful insights and effective 
practices that museums could engage in to move further towards inclusion including 
and beyond the study site. Staff from the following institutions were interviewed for this 
study: ¡Explora!, Kohl Children’s Museum, Wow! Children’s Museum, Sciencenter, Iowa 
Children’s Museum, The Peoria Playhouse Children’s Museum, Portland Children’s 
Museum, and Madison Children’s Museum. Each of the institutions had dedicated 
sensory-friendly hours and accessibility resources, as a response to the common barrier 
of sensory-overload during crowded, noisy days at the museum. In addition, funding, 
time, and space were identified as common barriers within many of the museums. The 
strongest correlation between the peer institutions were their ongoing relationships with 
partners in the community that helped them resolve some of these issues. In addition, 
two of the museums identified the benefits of using Universal Design strategies and how 
it eased the creation of inclusive experiences at their organizations.   
Accessibility & Inclusion Survey 
An Accessibility & Inclusion Survey was developed specifically for this study by 
the author. This survey was conducted online with three main constituent groups who 
have visited the study site with children with ASD. This method was utilized to assess 
the Museum’s current inclusion efforts from the perspective of visitors who 
accompany/care for children with ASD and to identify barriers that exist in the Museum 
for children with ASD. Survey results indicated that most respondents saw the Museum 

31 
 
as an exciting or unfamiliar environment where the child could be entertained and spend 
time with classmates, family, and/or friends. In addition, participants were motivated to 
visit the Museum, so the child/children could learn and connect to an area of their 
interest. A variety of tools, resources, and modifications were identified as helpful by 
participants. The benefit of having accessibility tools, environmental modifications, and 
designated sensory-friendly events were all highlighted by participants as helpful for 
creating a positive experience for the child. Participants felt that large crowds and noise 
level were a significant barrier to the children. Most respondents stated that the 
child/children had not participated in any classes, camps, and/or programs at the 
Museum--but would be interested. Perceived barriers to their participation included 
unknown environmental factors and the need for additional support during such a 
program if their caregiver was not present. Free, daily programs were identified as 
possible opportunities for children with ASD to participate in regularly occurring 
programs at the Museum.  
Observations 
The Museum’s daily programs including Storytime, Music Time, Block Building, 
and Art Studio visits were observed in order to identify strategies for improving museum 
resources and staffing that would support a more neurodiverse audience at the Museum 
on a consistent basis. Daily programs represent learning opportunities, outside of 
exhibitions, at the Museum that are free and regularly available to visitors. The 
Museum’s Sensory Story & Play Time was specifically designed for visitors with ASD 
and takes place during accessibility events. Therefore, it was observed in conjunction 

32 
 
with the other daily programs to evaluate if and how this program provided a more 
inclusive experience.  
During observations, basic information was gathered about the participants 
including the number of participants and perceived approximate age range. In addition, 
observations focused on how participants (including staff and visitors) interacted during 
the program, vocalized statements that reflected the program’s activities or 
environment, and tools, resources, and/or modifications that were observed during a 
program. Areas of need for specific tools, resources, and/or modifications that could be 
identified through observation were also noted. Through observation, it was identified 
that the daily programs could benefit from UDL, as the current facilitation, program 
content, and learning environment lacked what was necessary to make the daily 
programs inclusive to children with ASD. The Museum’s Sensory Story & Play Time 
program served as an example of a supportive environment for a neurodiverse 
audience. Therefore, aspects of this program could be implemented in the current daily 
programmatic offerings to help make them more inclusive as well.  
During this study, multiple staff members at the study site were interviewed about 
the history of daily programming at the Museum, staff positions and training, and the 
Museum’s current efforts related to inclusion for children with ASD.  
Study Site  
The study site is a private, non-profit children’s museum located in a suburban 
community in Illinois. The community has a population of approximately 147,000, and a 
median household income of approximately $110,000, almost double the U.S. median 
household income of $59,039. (U.S. Census Bureau 2018) Median household income 

33 
 
means 50% of households have income above that amount and half have income below 
that amount. While the study site is in one of Illinois’ more affluent suburbs, it serves a 
diverse audience. The Museum served visitors from over 500 zip codes in Illinois during 
fiscal year 2016-2017 many of whom have a wide range of socioeconomic 
backgrounds. In fiscal year 2016-2017, the Museum had 8,391 member families. 
Twenty percent (1,672) of these families benefit from a reduced-cost membership, 
which is offered to families who qualify for financial assistance. (Annual Report 2017) 
Census reports indicate that 4.4% of residents in the city where the study site is located 
identified as having a disability (U.S. Census Bureau 2018). This compares to 11.1% of 
people in Illinois (Erickson 2017) and 12.6% of the U.S. population (Kraus 2017). In the 
2015 State Autism Profile for Illinois, it was reported that approximately 7.02% of the 
children with disabilities (ages 3-21) who receive special education services in Illinois 
have autism; this number rose from 1.46% in 2000 (Easter Seals 2015).  
The study site serves over 300,000 visitors annually. It has approximately 18,000 
square feet of exhibit space that is designed primarily for children 0-10 years old. The 
Museum’s exhibits and programs are primarily based in S.T.E.A.M. content (science, 
technology, engineering, art, and math). The Museum has created a learning framework 
that serves as a foundation behind the design of their exhibits and programs. The 
learning framework contains the following tenets:  
● Remain innovative by informing our work through current research 
● Explore the intersection of Art, Math, and Science with accurate, age-appropriate 
content 
● Promote persistent, self-directed learning and encourage risk taking and learning 
from failure 
● Provide opportunities to use real tools, materials, and equipment 
● Engage all children and their adult partners in child-led play experiences that 
encourage curiosity, exploration, and collaboration 

34 
 
● Create unique opportunities for open-ended, process-oriented experiences with 
the potential for multiple outcomes 
● Foster inclusivity for all children and their adult partners 
● Be mindful of commercial influence (Learning Framework 2018) 
 
 
The mission, vision, and core beliefs of the institution reflect the commitments in their 
learning framework. These statements highlight hands-on exploration, the power of play 
as a basis for constructing knowledge, the child-adult learning partnership, and igniting 
the potential of children to learn through play (Who We Are 2018). In addition, the 
Museum also has a dedicated Inclusion Statement:  
…we believe that our strength lies in diversity among the broad range of people 
that we serve. [the Museum] respects, values, and celebrates the unique 
attributes, characteristics, and perspectives that make each person who they are. 
We are committed to providing a safe, accepting environment with unique 
learning opportunities for all children and families who visit the Museum. (Who 
We Are 2018) 
 
The Museum’s learning framework, mission statements, and inclusion statement all 
reflect Falk and Dierking’s (1992) three contexts that impact an experience and learning 
environment. For example, respecting and celebrating the personal characteristics and 
perspectives that visitors bring into the Museum (personal context), engaging children 
and their adult partners in child-led play experiences (social context), and providing a 
safe, accepting, and unique learning environment (physical context). These 
commitments reflex a strong foundation and passion for providing an experience that is 
supportive of a universal audience. The Museum’s President & CEO has expressed 
support of this project and approved the use of the Museum as a study site further 
attesting to the Museum’s commitment to valuing and improving the experience of 
visitors with ASD. 
 

35 
 
Museum Staff 
Currently, the Museum has 29 full-time staff and 66 part-time staff. The 
Museum’s staff are divided into six departments, including: Executive, Finance and 
Administration, Marketing and Sales, Education and Programs, Exhibits and 
Operations, and Development as evident in the Museum’s organizational chart (see 
Figure 3.1).  
 
 

36 
 
Figure 3.1: Study Site Organizational Chart (2018)  

37 
 
The Education and Programs department is the largest department at the 
Museum and is directly related to their accessibility and inclusion efforts. The 
department is led by the Director of Education and Programs, and consists of eleven 
additional full-time positions, including: Museum Experience Manager, Public Programs 
Coordinator, Art and Maker Specialist, STEM Specialist and School Programs Manager, 
Early Learning Specialist, Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist, Assistant School 
Programs Manager, a Lead Play Facilitator, and three Lead Learning Labs and Play 
Facilitators. The rest of the department is made up of part-time staff, including an 
Education Bookings Coordinator, Learning Lab Facilitators, and Play Facilitators. 
Positions in this department that are especially relevant to the design and delivery of 
daily and special programming are highlighted in the organizational chart (Figure 2.1). 
More detailed descriptions of these positions can be found in Appendix A.  
Facilitation Staff Training 
 
The Lead Play Facilitator, Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitators, and Play 
Facilitators are responsible for facilitating the child/adult visitor interaction with exhibits 
and daily/special programming. In addition, Museum volunteers assist staff in facilitation 
throughout the Museum. Investing in the training of facilitation staff is vital to the 
success of daily programming, because they have a direct impact on the experience of 
visitors.  
 
Facilitation staff begin their training at the Museum through a training website, 
which includes Museum history, an overview of the Museum’s exhibits, radio 
procedures, dress code, emergency procedures, facilitation, and Wakanheza. The 
Wakanheza Project™ is a set of principles and strategies, designed by Saint Paul-

38 
 
Ramsey County Public Health (2018), that help individuals, agencies, businesses, and 
communities prevent or de-escalate stressful situations in public. In turn, these efforts 
create a more welcoming environment for children and their families. The Wakanheza 
Project™ includes six principles: judgement, culture, powerlessness, empathy and 
respect, environment, and the moment. In summary, the principles revolve around the 
idea that suspending one’s judgements or personal beliefs, showing understanding and 
empathy towards others, and creating a welcoming environment, can support more 
healthy interactions between children, adults, and families. In turn, the strategies and 
principles of The Wakanheza Project™ can help to prevent family violence (Saint Paul-
Ramsey County Public Health 2018).  
After completing modules on the training website, staff spend approximately five 
shifts on the exhibit floor, shadowing Lead staff or more experienced Play Facilitators. 
New staff shadow daily programs during this part of their training and learn the basic 
responsibilities of facilitating these programs. According to the Museum Experience 
Manager, these basic responsibilities include: gathering materials prior to the program 
(5 minutes), placing a sign outside the program space, facilitating activities during the 
program, counting and recording the number of child and adult participants, and putting 
supplies away after the program (5 minutes). There is currently no Lead or Manager 
supervision during daily programming, and no evaluation system in progress. There is 
also no direct relationship between the Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist and the 
facilitation staff. In addition, other than shadowing peers, there is no training specifically 
allocated towards facilitating daily programs during the onboarding process or ongoing 

39 
 
training initiatives (such as might be built into the annual staff performance review 
process).  
After onboarding, there are approximately fourteen (1.5 hour) training sessions 
for facilitation staff throughout the year. These trainings relate to customer service, 
accessibility, the Art Studio, facilitation of the exhibits, emergency training, etc. In 
addition, facilitation staff participate in short, 15-minute trainings prior to their shift every 
day. These meetings tend to focus on any important updates regarding the Museum’s 
exhibits, events, procedures, etc. The Museum Experience Manager points to staff 
turnover in the Public Programs Coordinator position as the main reason behind the 
lack of daily program facilitation training; because of frequent turnover, training for daily 
program facilitation has not received the attention it deserves. The lack of facilitator 
training has led to some negative visitor feedback about the quality of daily 
programming compared to their expectations. In turn, the number of staff members who 
can facilitate daily programs has been reduced to those who appear or claim to be 
comfortable facilitating daily programs. According to the Museum Experience Manager, 
this reduction in able staff leads to logistical headaches when attempting to schedule 
facilitators.  
 
According to the Museum’s Manager of Volunteer Resources, there are three 
types of Museum volunteers that can be found assisting facilitators in the Museum. 
Museum volunteers are trained by the Manager of Volunteer Resources with the help of 
other members of the Education and Programs team. Museum Assistants, or the base 
level of museum volunteer, are given a general, 1-1.5-hour training about the museum 
and how to reset exhibits.  These volunteers clean and reset exhibits throughout the 

40 
 
day. Play Assistants receive an additional 1-1.5 hours of training focused on facilitating 
with families in the Museum’s exhibits. Generally, Play Assistants perform many of the 
same duties as Play Facilitation staff. However, these individuals are not responsible for 
any emergency procedures. Their main objective is to maintain a clean, safe 
environment and to facilitate play. The third type of volunteer is specifically recruited for 
the Art Studio. Art Studio volunteers receive basic training from the Manager of 
Volunteer Resources and additional training related to the Art Studio and facilitation 
from the Art and Maker Specialist. Museum volunteers are not responsible for 
facilitating daily programming, with the exception of the Art Studio.  
History of Daily Programming at the Museum 
 
The Director of Education and Programs and Museum Experience Manager were 
interviewed about the history of daily programming at the Museum. According to the 
Museum Experience Manager, daily programming began in the form of exhibit pop-ups 
just over a decade ago. Each exhibit “neighborhood” or thematic area of the Museum’s 
permanent exhibits had a binder with about five activities from which staff could choose. 
Some of the activities required staff facilitation, while others were in the form of exhibit 
enhancements (i.e. interactive toys or manipulatives that related to the exhibit area). 
They recalled that exhibit pop-ups made the facilitators’ shifts more interesting and gave 
them another way to interact with visitors. In addition, this type of programming was 
relatively inexpensive as the activities or manipulatives chosen for each neighborhood 
were reusable. Exhibit pop-ups were not advertised to visitors, rather staff could choose 
to do an activity depending on the visitor traffic in a neighborhood. While this type of 
pop-up was a fun surprise for visitors, they noted that the Museum’s marketing team 

41 
 
was unable to advertise them due to their pop-up nature. In turn, the Museum was 
unable to use the programming as a marketed enhancement to a museum visit. In 
addition, they recalled that transitioning activities during daily staff rotation was 
sometimes difficult because staff could potentially inherit an activity from another team 
member that they were not as comfortable facilitating. In early 2015, the Museum 
experienced a flood that forced it to close for a period of nine months during 
reconstruction. The Museum Experience Manager noted that exhibit pop-ups ended 
with the flood and did not return when the museum reopened in late 2015. In fact, the 
Museum had no form of free daily programming, with the exception of the Art Studio, 
until fall of 2017 with the introduction of a new Director of Education and Programs.  
 
According to the Director of Education and Programs, during their interview 
during the hiring process the Museum’s Executive Leadership team expressed the 
desire for more daily programming at the Museum. However, the team had inconsistent 
feelings about whether to charge visitors to participate in daily programs. In response, 
the Director of Education and Programs described a daily program system that they had 
setup at a Museum in a previous role which included various program types including 
times for storytelling. After they joined the Museum in the summer of 2017, the Director 
of Education and Programs designed a similar program structure for the Museum 
including, Storytime, Music Time, and Block Building. These free daily programs were 
originally scheduled to occur at multiple times throughout the Museum’s general 
operating hours. Programming began in late September 2017. According to the 
Museum Experience Manager, training for the Museum’s Play Facilitators and Lead 
Learning Labs and Play Facilitators did not begin until the Museum’s annual 

42 
 
maintenance period which takes place in early September. Therefore, the majority of 
staff training for daily programming took place after the programs had already begun. 
They stressed that the quick initiation of the new programming and subsequent lack of 
training had an impact on the quality of facilitation and the overall programs. For 
example, the majority of such staff members had no background in teaching music. 
Therefore, even though they had the equipment necessary to run the program, they 
lacked the training required to support effective facilitation. In addition, digital technology 
(e.g. the use of an iPad to project digital books onto a screen) was introduced after the 
initiation of the Storytime program without sufficient training, which made the facilitating 
staff nervous and uncomfortable about using the technology. For the remaining portion 
of fiscal year 2017-2018 (July 2017-June 2018), a staff member was removed from the 
exhibit floor to facilitate daily programs, absorbing the cost for facilitation into general 
staffing costs. There was no budget for daily programming, therefore materials and 
equipment were purchased by piecing together funds from various budget lines.  
In January 2018, the decision was made to modify daily programming to reduce 
the number of sessions and exclude Block Building. Observations for this study took 
place prior to the removal of Block Building as a specific daily program. According to the 
Director of Education and Programs, the Museum reduced the number of programs due 
to a lack of attendance during some session times (i.e. late afternoon sessions had very 
low attendance). In addition, Block Building was removed because of logistical issues. 
For example, Block Building took place on the second level of the Museum which is 
staffed by one facilitator. Therefore, that facilitator was removed from the exhibits during 
Block Building. According to the Museum Experience Manager, staff had difficulty multi-

43 
 
tasking (i.e. facilitating a program and maintaining a safe/clean exhibit environment at 
the same time). In addition, the facilitation that happened during Block Building was 
similar to interactions already happening between staff and visitors outside of daily 
programming. Therefore, the Museum felt that this type of facilitation would continue 
without a specific program. The Museum Experience Manager noted that the absence 
and frequent turnover of the Public Programs Coordinator position affected daily 
programming. This staff member is responsible for the development of program content 
and related training of facilitation staff with the exception of the Art Studio which is the 
responsibility of the Art and Maker Specialist. The Museum hired a new Public 
Programs Coordinator in May 2018.  
Currently, there are three daily programs that occur during a typical day at the 
Museum: Storytime, Music Time, and the Art Studio. Sensory Story & Play Time occurs 
during the Museum’s two accessibility events: Third Thursdays and Family Night Out. 
The current Public Programs Coordinator, who maintains the Storytime and Music Time 
programs, recognized that these programs are suffering due to a lack of training and an 
understanding of how to use the materials available. One of their main position goals for 
fiscal year 2018-2019 is to improve these programs by enhancing the content available 
to facilitators, providing them with more training opportunities, and establishing a system 
for reviewing the quality of these programs.  
The Public Programs Coordinator is currently working with members of the Lead 
Learning Lab and Play Facilitation team to develop felt stories, activities that incorporate 
books and instruments in the Museum’s collection, and songs and activities that 
incorporate movement. They hope that providing more specific content, including 

44 
 
planned lessons and activities, will support facilitators that have less experience with 
program delivery. In addition, they are working with the Museum Experience Manager to 
schedule and implement trainings for facilitators that are specifically related to daily 
programming. These trainings will focus on introducing the facilitation staff to new 
content for Storytime and Music Time, give them strategies they can use to facilitate 
programs in a more interactive way, and provide them with time to practice facilitation 
with their coworkers. Finally, the Public Programs Coordinator noted that evaluation is 
another priority for daily programming. Visitor experience of daily programs will be 
collected through participation surveys. In addition, they plan to conduct observations of 
staff facilitating the programs to gather insight into where to focus ongoing training. It 
may also be helpful for supervisors to communicate with facilitation staff after programs 
understand how they feel about the current programming and what strategies may help 
improve it.  
 
The Public Programs Coordinator noted that even though improvements for daily 
programs are one of their current goals, they often feel conflicted about where to devote 
their time. They indicated that they feel an ongoing pressure to deliver quality large-
scale events and paid program opportunities on a regular basis which takes up the 
majority of their time. Therefore, they struggle to find time to focus on daily 
programming initiatives. The Public Programs Coordinator noted that bringing in 
community partners to facilitate some daily program sessions has helped relieve current 
staffing constraints and provided visitors with expanded content. The Museum 
Experience Manager noted that additional funds were written into the current budget to 
provide an additional Play Facilitator into the daily schedule to avoid taking a staff 

45 
 
member from the exhibit floor. However, they are currently unable to schedule an 
additional Play Facilitator due to current position vacancies and a lack of applicants.  
Current Accessibility Efforts for Children with ASD 
As previously mentioned, the Museum has two existing accessibility programs 
that directly relate to children with ASD. The first accessibility program, Third 
Thursdays, occurs once a month and is open to the public. The Museum stays open 
late and provides special programming for visitors with accessibility or medical issues. 
The only environmental modification during this program is turning down or providing 
special lighting in the Art Studio. Special programming begins at 4:00 p.m. (the 
Museum’s usual closing time) and can include a trained comfort dog, sensory art 
projects in the Art Studio, afterschool programming with specialists to assist with 
specific IEP (Individualized Education Program) and at-home goals, and a Sensory 
Story & Play Time. Accessibility resources are readily available during this evening 
program and are displayed at the front desk. This program requires general admission 
or membership for entry.  
The second accessibility program at the Museum, Family Night Out, is a pre-
registered, after-hours event for children with special needs and their families. This 
program focuses on serving those with ASD and other sensory processing disorders as 
well as physical disabilities. At the beginning of this study, this program occurred 
quarterly.  However, due to its popularity and increased funding through grants and 
private donors, this program is now offered once per month between the months of 
September and June. Family Night Out is free for visitors, but pre-registration is 
required. Registration is capped at 225 guests to maintain a quieter, less busy 

46 
 
environment. Specialized programming during this event includes: family yoga, Sensory 
Story & Play Time, non-profit and for-profit special needs service vendors, sensory art 
projects in the Museum’s Art Studio, and a visit with a trained comfort dog. Accessibility 
resources are readily available during this evening program and are displayed at the 
front desk (see Figure 2.2). 
Figure 3.2: Resources at Accessibility Events 
 
In addition to their two accessibility programs, the Museum offers a variety of 
resources for individuals with disabilities. These resources are listed on their website’s 
Accessibility & Inclusion page. Resources include: noise-reducing headphones, time 
timers, time trackers, social narratives (e.g. Social Stories), a therapeutic play guide, 
picture communication symbol guides, an adult-size wheel chair, fidget toys, exhibit flip 

47 
 
cards, and a Velcro picture binder. These resources are kept in a cabinet at the front 
desk and are available for check-out using a photo ID. There is no sign indicating the 
availability of these resources, but a pamphlet about the Museum’s accessibility 
resources is on display at the front desk. The Museum has a few environmental 
modifications for visitors with ASD including some alternative seating, a family restroom, 
and a quiet room. The Museum’s quiet room has a sofa, dimmed blue lighting, a marble 
wall, and fidget toys. The Accessibility & Inclusion page contains descriptions and dates 
for upcoming accessibility events, downloadable versions of their social narratives and 
guides, “Know Before You Go” tips about what to expect in their music and water 
exhibits, and a link to the Museum’s virtual tour. The virtual tour allows visitors to see 
the Museum’s exhibit and layout before their visit. This helps to alleviate concerns for 
some children who experience anxiety about new venues. The Museum offers 
complimentary admission for licensed one-on-one caregivers and therapists when they 
accompany a child requiring medical assistance. 
 
According to the Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist, the Museum incorporates 
accessibility and inclusion as a focus in training quarterly. Trainings have involved the 
entire museum team and front-line team and have been conducted in-house and by 
consultants. The Museum would like to offer accessibility and inclusion training on a 
more consistent basis in the future. According to the Accessibility and Inclusion 
Specialist, more training about understanding ASD and other sensory processing 
disorders is necessary to increasing the confidence of staff who work with this audience.  
 
Accessibility and inclusion are often brought up in the planning process for 
programming, however except for Sensory Story & Play Time, the museum has yet to 

48 
 
incorporate inclusion efforts into daily programming. The museum has explored offering 
camps specifically designed for children with ASD, however the cost to develop and 
implement this type of program was too costly. According to the Accessibility and 
Inclusion Specialist, many other therapeutic organizations already offer this type of 
program. Therefore, it would be better to partner with another facility that already has 
many of the necessary resources to offer a specialized program.  
 
The study site engages with various community partners regarding accessibility 
and inclusion at the Museum. The Museum has an Accessibility Inclusion Diversity and 
Equity Committee (AIDE) made up of employees from various departments at the 
Museum, including the President & CEO, Director of Finance and Administration, 
Executive Assistant, Digital Marketing Coordinator, Public Programs Coordinator, a 
Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitator, two Visitor Services Team Members, Human 
Resources Manager, and Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist. The committee meets 
bi-monthly. AIDE is the force behind creating and maintaining an inclusive culture at the 
Museum. This committee discusses and recommends ways to enhance the Museum’s 
current inclusion efforts and makes recommendations to the Executive Leadership 
team. The Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist also coordinates an Autism Roundtable 
that aides in the creation of new programs and initiatives related to this audience. This 
group is comprised of various community partners, including:  
• Occupational Therapists: North Central University, Lewis University, Midwestern 
University, and Marionjoy Rehabilitative Hospital (Pediatric OT) 
• Therapeutic Day Schools, Private Sector Therapists, and Educators: Helping 
Hands, Little Friends, Turning Pointe, Giant Steps, earlyVention, and a preschool 
teacher 
• 10 parents of children with a range of special needs  
 

49 
 
The Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist identified funding as the greatest barrier 
regarding inclusion. The Museum currently has a small budget that is dedicated to 
inclusion efforts. This budget is supplemented with grants, private donations, and in-
kind services. They state that there is just not enough money or space for everything 
they would like to do regarding inclusion.  
  
 
 

50 
 
Chapter 4: PEER MUSEUM INTERVIEWS 
Introduction 
Requests for interviews were sent by phone or email to representatives from 
fifteen children’s museums from across the United States. These institutions were 
chosen because of their visible accessibility and inclusion efforts, usually found online 
or by reference from another organization and their status as a children’s museum. 
Representatives from eight children’s museums responded to the request for an 
interview, including ¡Explora! (Albuquerque, NM), Kohl Children’s Museum (Glenview, 
IL), Wow! Children’s Museum (Lafayette, CO), Sciencenter (Ithaca, NY), Iowa 
Children’s Museum (Coralville, IA), The Peoria PlayHouse Children’s Museum (Peoria, 
IL), Portland Children’s Museum (Portland, OR), and Madison Children’s Museum 
(Madison, WI). In addition, the Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist at the study site 
was interviewed. Each interview lasted approximately 45-90 minutes. Interview 
questions were developed by the researcher and focused on basic information about 
the institution, staff and training, programs and resources, and funding and support. For 
a list of interview questions, see Appendix B.  Interviews were conducted to identify 
shared obstacles in providing inclusive experiences for children with ASD; in the hopes 
to develop some helpful insights and effective practices that museums can engage in to 
move further towards inclusion.  
Findings 
¡Explora!  
¡Explora! is a 501(c)(3) non-profit, science, technology, and art learning center 
located in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The Museum’s mission is “¡Explora! creating 
opportunities for inspirational discovery and the joy of lifelong learning through 

51 
 
interactive experiences in science, technology, engineering, art, and math (¡Explora! 
2018).” The Museum’s exhibits are designed to engage visitors of all ages. ¡Explora! is 
approximately 48,000 sq. ft. and has 120 staff; 60 full-time staff and 60 part-time staff 
(including high school interns). They also offer educational programs for Pre-K – 8th 
Grade. As a part of their Cradle through Career STEM Learning Strategic Focus, the 
Museum continues to develop and implement programming for Early Explorers, ages 0-
4 years, Young Scientists, ages 5-12, and Future Science Leaders, ages 13-adult. Over 
316,000 people experienced ¡Explora! during fiscal year 2016-2017 (Ibid). The 
representative interviewed from ¡Explora! was Sarah Pratt. She is a Project Manager; 
helping to manage and run educational programming at the Museum. She also serves 
as a member of the Museum’s Autism Project and IDEA (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, 
and Access) teams.  
According to Sarah, the term “accessibility” refers to physical ways of providing 
access to a space (accessible parking, proper signage, etc.) The term “inclusion” has a 
more broad or philosophical meaning; making individuals feel welcome. For example, 
supporting individuals of all abilities in the same class or program and/or the thought 
process behind how they plan and invite people to their space. The Museum does not 
currently have an inclusion statement, but inclusion is something that she reports keeps 
coming up in discussions regarding an update to the Museum’s core values.   
¡Explora! has about 25 staff that actively think about accessibility on an ongoing 
basis as members of the Autism Project and/or IDEA teams. These teams are cross-
departmental and involve staff from Visitor Services, Administration, Community 
Engagement, Education, and Exhibits. Explora’s Director of Education and Director of 

52 
 
Visitor Services are most directly involved in accessibility and inclusion at the Museum. 
Over the past three years, ¡Explora! has developed new resources, summer camps, 
and sensory-friendly events for children and families affected by ASD. This 3-year 
Autism Project is funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services and United 
Way of Central New Mexico.   
As a part of the Autism Project, the Museum partnered with the New Mexico 
Autism Society to provide ASD 101 training to their front-line staff. These trainings have 
covered what autism is, what it looks like, what it means in the museum environment, 
and various accessibility resources. They have also held all staff trainings related to 
behavior and de-escalation with board-certified behavioral therapists. When asked if 
Sarah felt that staff has the tools and training necessary to introduce inclusive strategies 
during programs, she responded that they still have some areas for improvement. 
Currently, they are working to find time for both educators and frontline staff to attend 
trainings together on a more consistent basis. However, she noted that some training 
can be difficult to practice without an organic or real-life experience (e.g. de-escalation). 
This is one of the main challenges they are still working on. Another barrier to inclusion 
that ¡Explora! is facing is capacity; the amount of time, thought, and preparation 
necessary to design and implement new inclusion practices. While staff have a strong 
passion and interest for this work, they often feel like they are short on time.  
According to Sarah, ¡Explora! is still in the early stages of incorporating 
accessibility and inclusion into the planning process for programs and events. However, 
their work on the Autism Project combined with their open-ended philosophy has helped 
them develop social narratives (e.g. Social Stories), visual schedules, sensory 

53 
 
resources, and modifications to their camps to create a more inclusive experience. One 
initiative during the Autism Project was the creation of EXPLORA-tions camps for 
children with autism and their peers. These are week-long camps for children ages 5-7 
and 7-10. Their Companion Camp for Siblings and Friends of Children with Autism was 
designed for children K-4th Grade. Strategies for making these camps more inclusive 
included:  
• Providing visual instruction for the day, week, and individual activities 
• Providing sensory stories for the camp experience 
• Limiting the attendance (8 registrants per camp instead of 15) 
• Increasing the staff presence and supplementing with volunteer occupational 
therapy students from a nearby university (approximately a 1:1 adult to camper 
ratio) 
• Providing a sensory break tent space for campers and various resources (time 
timers, sensory fidgets, headphones, etc.) 
 
In addition to camps, ¡Explora! offers sensory friendly hours every other month during 
the school year on Sunday mornings before the Museum opens to the public. In 
addition, they offered two sensory friendly events per month during the summer on 
Sunday evenings after the Museum closed. These summer sensory events were 
included within the grant funding for the Autism Project. ¡Explora! also offers various 
resources helpful to visitors with ASD including: a sensory map, social narratives, 
fidgets, and visual schedules. Pre-visit resources and a list of on-site resources are 
available online. Visitors can access on-site resources at the front desk or ask a staff 
member to access one of the kits located throughout the Museum. Sarah commented 
that as they build trust within the community, visitors feel welcome to bring their own 
resources from home as well.  
 
Sarah believes ¡Explora!’s greatest strength to providing an inclusive experience 
is their staff’s passion. Initially, she wondered when individuals left the organization, if 

54 
 
the inclusion work would continue to be supported. She now feels confident that 
¡Explora!’s inclusion efforts are an organizational passion. Staff are interested and 
invested in applying inclusion practices to their jobs and they want to continue learning. 
Sarah noted the importance of sharing stories and talking about the relationships staff 
are making with this community; how these conversations continue to inspire them to 
keep working towards inclusion. 
Kohl Children’s Museum 
Kohl Children’s Museum (KCM) of Greater Chicago is a 501(c)(3) non-profit 
children’s museum located in Glenview, IL. The Museum’s mission is to “be an essential 
leader in providing playful experiences that inspire every child (Kohl Children’s Museum 
2018).” The Museum’s exhibits are designed to be interactive, hands-on experiences for 
children birth to 8. KCM is approximately 46,700 sq. ft. (23,000 sq. ft. of public space) 
with an additional 2-acres of outdoor exhibit space. The Museum has 80 staff; 30 full-
time staff and 50 part-time staff. KCM opened their current location in 2005. The facility 
was built from the ground up, based on the principles of Universal Design. Over 
315,000 people experienced KCM during fiscal year 2016-2017 (Kohl Children’s 
Museum 2017). The representative interviewed from KCM was Stephanie Bynum, Vice 
President of Programs. In her role at the Museum, Stephanie oversees three 
departments: Education, Exhibits, and Visitor Experience. 
One of the Museum’s core values represents their commitment to inclusion: “All 
Museum facilities, exhibits and programming are accessible by children in the same 
manner, regardless of differing levels of physical, auditory, visual, social-emotional, or 
cognitive ability (Kohl Children’s Museum 2018).” They also have a dedicated Diversity 

55 
 
Statement that echoes this core value. Stephanie says the museum’s greatest strength 
regarding accessibility and inclusion is that it is baked into their philosophy as an 
organization; Universal Design has been a driving force for the Museum since the 
beginning. For example, when they are designing programs, Universal Design is one of 
the first things they think about; they want to make sure the widest range of people can 
access the program.  Annually, the Museum conducts an audit on their exhibit design to 
evaluate how the physical environment affects individuals with disabilities. The 
Museum’s website also undergoes an annual accessibility evaluation. 
Stephanie identified busier days as the Museum’s greatest barrier regarding 
accessibility and inclusion. The typical noise and crowds brought on by days with high 
attendance are not usually conducive to children with disabilities. In response, KCM 
encourages visitors to come to the Museum on days that typically have lower 
attendance. The Museum also provides quieter visitation times like Everyone at 
Play and exclusive member mornings. Everyone at Play events are free accessibility 
events that offer families time to experience the Museum’s exhibits and programs in a 
less-crowded, more relaxed environment. For these events, the Museum provides small 
manipulative toys, a quiet area, dimmed lighting, and quieter announcements. In 
addition, the Museum invites partner organizations to these events that provide therapy 
dogs, OT/PT services, art therapy, etc. Attendance is pre-registered and limited to 300 
visitors for these accessibility events. However, no visitors are turned away on the day 
of the event, including those who have not pre-registered. Currently, Everyone at 
Play events are sponsored. However, Stephanie noted that these events are a priority 
for the Museum and they would happen without sponsorship.  

56 
 
The Museum works with numerous organizations on accessibility and inclusion 
efforts. Notably, they worked with Pathways.org to create the Parent’s Guide to Kohl 
Children’s Museum of Greater Chicago. This resource was created to help parents and 
their children navigate which exhibits they want to experience during their visit to the 
Museum. Pathways.org is a non-profit foundation dedicated to providing free resources, 
to caregivers and professionals, to support child growth and development 
(Pathways.org 2018). The guide is available in English and Spanish on the Museum’s 
website and at their Admission’s Desk. 
According to Stephanie, KCM is always looking to improve and learn more 
regarding accessibility and inclusion, “We are doing a lot of great things, but we could 
always do more.” As new research comes out, the Museum continues to look at their 
exhibits with a critical eye. In addition, they activity engage with their community and 
encourage feedback from their partner organizations and visitors.  
Wow! Children’s Museum 
Wow! Children’s Museum is a 501(c)(3) non-profit children’s museum located in 
Layfette, Colorado. The Museum’s mission is to engage “all families in educational, 
hands-on experiences that connect curiosity, creativity, and discovery (Wow! Children’s 
Museum 2018).” Their exhibits are designed for children ages one to eleven and cover 
a variety of subjects, including STEM, art, music, dance, theater, health, and practical 
life (Ibid). The Museum has fifteen staff; five full-time staff and ten part-time staff. During 
fiscal year 2016-2017, the Museum served over 91,000 visitors. The representative 
interviewed from Wow! Children’s Museum was Alexandra Wong, Community Educator. 

57 
 
In her role at the Museum, Alexandra writes and facilitates the Museum’s on-site and 
off-site programs.  
Wow! Children’s Museum has a dedicated statement that defines the museum’s 
commitment to inclusion:  
WOW! Children’s Museum is committed to being a gathering place for all Boulder 
County children and families.  We believe in the power of learning through play to 
improve our lives and community.  We respect, value and celebrate the unique 
attributes, characteristics and perspectives that make each person who they are.  
We also believe that bringing diverse individuals together allows us to better 
understand, support and engage our community. It is our aim, therefore, that our 
Museum and programs are accessible, meaningful and welcoming to all 
audiences. (Ibid) 
 
 
As a part of their inclusion efforts, the Museum hosts Sensory Friendly Playtime; a free, 
low sensory program for children with autism spectrum or sensory processing disorders. 
For this event, the Museum limits the number of attendees (20 families), lowers sound 
and light levels, and provides adaptive equipment (e.g. noise cancelling headphones 
and weighted vests). If available, the Museum has an occupational therapist or art 
therapist at the event to help facilitate low sensory activities. This program is sponsored 
by KidSPOT Pediatric Therapies and the Play for All Initiative. Play for All is a donor 
supported initiative that allows the Museum to offer reduced-price memberships to 
families in financial need, discounted field trips and outreach visits for schools, and free 
admission to Sensory Friendly Playtime events (Wow! Children’s Museum 2017). The 
Museum also offers a downloadable social narrative on their website.  
 
Wow! Children’s Museum recently received grants from both IMLS and the 
Dodge Family Fund to help fund their new exhibit Forest of Light. This new exhibit is 
sensory friendly, encourages play between children of all abilities, and incorporates 

58 
 
creativity skills, sensory experiences, and emotional and social wellness (Wow! 
Children’s Museum 2018). The Museum’s exhibit designer worked with occupational 
therapists during the design process. Forest of Light includes: a darkened forest space, 
an interactive river, a giant pin wall, a life size lite brite, a fluttering kaleidoscope, and a 
hideout hollow. According to the Museum, the sensory play in this exhibit “supports 
language development, cognitive growth, fine and gross motor skills, problem solving 
skills, and social interaction (Ibid). Alexandra views the exhibit as one of the Museum’s 
greatest accomplishments supporting accessibility and inclusion.  
 
Alexandra noted how accessibility and inclusion impacts the planning process for 
programs and events at the Museum. During programs, staff try to highlight one sensory 
experience at a time, give children the chance to get up and move around, incorporate a 
fun game into classes, keep the room design simple, and bring books into all their 
classes for children who need a break. In addition, for visiting school groups, Alexandra 
provides a schedule for the day’s activities and pictures of the staff members who will 
facilitate the program. These strategies help students understand what to expect when 
they arrive at the Museum and make transitions easier.  
 
When asked what barriers Wow! Children’s Museum has regarding accessibility 
and inclusion, Alexandra noted that other Museum visitors can sometimes be the 
biggest barrier to guests with ASD. For example, visitors have made complaints about 
children with ASD in the past and it can be difficult to get visitors to feel comfortable 
around individuals with disabilities. The Museum has worked with occupational 
therapists to provided training for their staff about how to respond to these guests.  
 

59 
 
Sciencenter  
 
The Sciencenter is a non-profit, hands-on science museum located in Ithaca, 
New York. The Sciencenter is a member of both the Association of Science-Technology 
Centers (ASTC) and ACM. The Museum is accredited by AAM. The Museum’s mission 
is “To inspire excitement for science through interactive exhibits and programs that 
engage, educate, and empower (Sciencenter 2018).” The Sciencenter is 32,000 sq. ft. 
and has 27 staff members (seven or eight of whom are part-time). Nearly 110,000 
guests experienced the Sciencenter in 2017.  The representative interviewed from the 
Sciencenter was Emily Belle, Education Facilitator. In her role, Emily interacts directly 
with visitors and facilitates Museum programs. She is also responsible for neurodiversity 
training and sensory hours at the Museum.  
 
According to Emily, the Sciencenter views accessibility as expanding access to 
the Museum by removing barriers. Inclusion is a product of removing barriers; by 
making the Museum more accessible they are becoming more inclusive. Emily noted 
that accessibility has been an ongoing priority for the Museum and its community, staff, 
and members. The Museum has a dedicated statement regarding inclusion:  
The Sciencenter is an inclusive organization that values diversity. We aspire to 
be an environment for our guests and our team where diversity is understood, 
recognized, respected, and celebrated to enrich the community overall and the 
individual lives of all members of the community. As a trusted community 
resource, we are a welcoming and sensitive place for all people regardless of 
gender, age, race, religious background, language, socio-economic status, 
ability, sexual orientation, or ethnicity. (Ibid) 
 
Accessibility resources and programs are a shared responsibility between departments. 
The Museum provides multiple social narratives, picture schedules, and calming kits for 
visitors. These resources can be found on the Museum’s website and at the front desk. 

60 
 
Calming Kits include sunglasses, noise-cancelling headphones, gloves, fidget and 
tactile toys (e.g. bendy straws and coated wires), and a visual analog timer. The 
Museum provides additional resources for camps and programs.  
 
Programs at the Sciencenter serve three main age groups: Early Explorers (0-5), 
Young Scientists (5-11), and Future Science Leaders (11-14). According to Emily, the 
Museum tries to have a variety of items in programming spaces that support different 
sensory needs. She noted that one of the great things about working with children ages 
zero to five is that many of the sensory practices or elements of program design utilized 
for this age group are supportive for audiences with ASD as well. Educators think about 
the language they use during programs; by using repetitive language they can make 
activities more accessible for children with ASD. In addition, they communicate with 
teachers to share information about available sensory resources and to identify groups 
that may need accommodations. These are strategies staff have learned through their 
Neurodiversity Training; developed in 2018. Training has included listening sessions 
with community partners, resource development, and strategies to help staff work with 
children with ASD. Accessibility and inclusion for a neurodiverse audience is a part of 
their ongoing conversation with staff and departments. Additional resources for camps 
and programs include a Hug-i-bo, pop-up pod, weighted gel lap pad, sequin mermaid 
pillow, weighted snake, ocean wave night light projector, sensory body sack, squishy 
mesh balls, wobble cushion, and Find-it games. Some of these resources are also 
utilized during sensory hours.  
 
According to Emily, the Museum has offered some form of Sensory Hours since 
May of 2015; the program has recently expanded. In 2017, the Sciencenter held four 

61 
 
events that attracted 142 attendees. By the end of 2018, the Museum will have held five 
or six designated programs. During these programs, the Sciencenter hangs additional 
signage to indicate particularly loud exhibits or intense lighting. She noted that the 
Museum has been moving towards using softer gallery lighting in general. There is 
usually a room devoted to a sensory activity like Flubber or Kinetic Sand. In addition, 
the Museum sets up a Calm Room with nature visuals/sounds and large sensory toys. 
The Sciencenter is less crowded and overwhelming during these designated Sensory 
Hours.  
 
Emily considers the greatest barrier the Sciencenter faces concerning 
accessibility and inclusion to be limited space. She would love to have a dedicated 
Sensory Room; a quiet place for visitors to take a break. She reports that they are 
finding creative ways to work around this issue through sensory resources like pop-up 
pods. Emily sees the Museum’s connections to other organizations and community 
partners as one of their greatest strengths. These relationships are extremely valuable, 
as ongoing conversations have influenced and inspired many of their current inclusion 
efforts.  
Iowa Children’s Museum 
 
Iowa Children’s Museum is a non-profit, hands-on educational organization 
located in Coralville, Iowa. The Museum’s mission is “to inspire every child to imagine, 
create, discover, and explore through the Power of Play!” (Iowa Children’s Museum 
2018). The Museum has 28,000 sq. ft. of exhibits that focus on Arts & Culture, Financial 
Literacy, Healthy Kids, School Readiness, and STEM. Iowa Children’s Museum has 42 
staff, including 12 full-time and 30 part-time staff. They serve over 170,000 guests each 

62 
 
year. The representative interviewed for the Museum was Aimee Mussman, Assistant 
Director. In her role, Aimee oversees the Education, Exhibits, and Playology 
Departments.  
 
Iowa Children’s Museum collaborates with a variety of organizations in their effort 
to be more inclusive. For the past ten years, they have collaborated with a local 
ChildServe organization. ChildServe provides specialized clinical, home, and 
community-based programs and services for children with developmental delays, 
disabilities, acquired injuries, and other special healthcare needs (ChildServe 2018). 
This organization helps the Museum provide a monthly, drop-off program for children 
with disabilities and their siblings. The Museum and ChildServe provide staff and 
volunteers to supervise children so that caregivers can have free-time. ChildServe has 
also developed a social narrative that details what it is like to visit the Museum. Another 
community partner that Iowa Children’s Museum has a relationship with is Kanics 
Inclusive Design Services, LLC, a local design firm that is committed to creating 
inclusive community spaces. The firm has consulted on exhibits and evaluated the 
Museum from an accessibility standpoint. Kanics has helped representatives from the 
Museum understand that ADA compliance alone is not inclusive; the firm helps 
organizations build experiences that mix the concepts of “universal design, sensory 
processing, and best practices on play (Kanics Inclusive Design 2018).” The Museum is 
working with KultureCity to further develop their accessibility training and resources. 
KultureCity is a non-profit organization that works with public spaces/businesses to help 
them create a sensory inclusive environment. They provide online training, sensory kits, 
signage, social narratives, and more. In addition, KultureCity has an app that people 

63 
 
can download to access information and resources for their Sensory Inclusive™ 
locations (e.g. businesses that have received their Sensory Inclusive™ accreditation).  
 
The Museum offers a variety of programming including Super Hero Nights, which 
are designed especially for families with children who have special needs. These free 
events occur monthly on Sunday evenings. Super Hero Nights tend to have a lower 
attendance and therefore offer a quieter and more welcoming environment in the 
exhibits for children with ASD. The Museum has a commitment to ensuring all children, 
regardless of ability, have access to the Museum. They describe this commitment in the 
following way:  
Every child is unique. Each grows and learns in his or her own special way. And 
without exception, all children love to play. Kids with disabilities are no different. 
Whether a child’s disability is mild or severe, obvious or not, that child is first and 
foremost a child—which means he or she will have the natural instinct to explore 
the world through play, just like any other child. (Iowa Children’s Museum 2018) 
 
Outside of Super Hero Nights, the Museum currently makes modifications to their 
programs on a case-by-case basis for children with ASD. For example, the Museum 
created a social narrative for their birthday party process when a child with ASD had 
their birthday at the Museum. Although the situation is rare, the Museum has provided 
accessibility resources (e.g. schedule cards and social narratives) for children during 
their camps and some individuals have attended with an aide.  
 
Aimee noted that the Museum is very open minded and willing to work with 
families who have children with special needs. She said the greatest barrier for their 
institution regarding inclusion is helping families understand that they can make 
requests and ask questions before they visit. In addition, she noted that change can 
come slowly in a large organization. However, she emphasized that they want families 

64 
 
to feel comfortable and know that the Museum is there to support them and remain free 
from judgement.  
The Peoria PlayHouse Children’s Museum 
 
The Peoria PlayHouse Children’s Museum is a non-profit, hands-on children’s 
museum located in Peoria, Illinois. The Museum is a Peoria Park District facility. Their 
mission is to “[provide] children with the tools and inspiration they need to be explorers 
and creators of the world. [They] do this in part through understanding, supporting, and 
promoting play in the fullest sense of the word, one that includes imagination and 
creativity (Peoria PlayHouse 2018).” During 2017, the Museum served 77,800 visitors. 
They have three full-time and sixteen part-time staff. The representatives interviewed for 
Peoria PlayHouse Children’s Museum were Kristin Vannatta, Operations Manager and 
Courtney Baxter, Education Manager. As Operations Manager, Kristin manages the 
Museum’s part-time staff, financial reporting, human resources, hiring/training, 
volunteers, customer service, etc. As Education Manager, Courtney develops and 
facilitates programs, coordinates the Museum’s monthly cultural events, trains staff, and 
runs the Museum’s homeschool programs. Kristin and Courtney worked together on an 
initiative to develop offerings for visitors with special needs.  
 
Beginning in 2015, the Museum worked with Easter Seals to provide training for 
their staff and to develop resources for families with special needs. The training 
provided information on different things staff might experience when working with 
children with physical, cognitive, and social/emotional disabilities. At the end of 2017, 
the Museum applied for and secured a grant funded by Leaders Change Illinois. This 
grant helped the Museum fund accessibility resources and Accessibility Nights. The 

65 
 
Museum provides a variety of resources including a social narrative, virtual tour, noise 
cancelling headphones, schedule cards, sensory toys, sunglasses, and transition guide 
cards (i.e. visual cue cards that signal a transition from one activity to the next). The 
Museum has limited space but utilizes their program rooms for quiet spaces when 
needed. Currently the Museum hosts Accessibility Nights twice per year in collaboration 
with Easter Seals and Heart of Illinois Special Recreation Association (HISRA). These 
partners help market the event to families. As these events become more popular, the 
Museum would like to hold them more often. Accessibility Nights are free to Museum 
members and $15 per family for non-members (general admission is $8.50 per person 
age 1-64). These events are targeted towards families with special needs but are open 
to children of all abilities. These evenings tend to attract about ten families and feature 
dimmer lights and less noise. There is no special programming for these events as the 
children tend to focus on the exhibits.  
 
Easter Seals and HISRA are important partners in Peoria PlayHouse Children’s 
Museum’s accessibility and inclusion efforts. Both organizations serve as resources for 
the Museum when planning for children with disabilities to participate in programs. They 
help the Museum provide a higher level of customer service by providing training 
opportunities. Kristin and Courtney believe that passion is one of their staff’s greatest 
strengths regarding accessibility and inclusion. Their staff are open, engaged, and 
excited about being able to help people have a great experience no matter what outside 
forces may be at play. They are very caring and eager to provide resources to support a 
positive experience. Kristin and Courtney believe training upfront is a part of that 
success. 

66 
 
 
When asked about their greatest barrier regarding inclusion, Kristin and Courtney 
identified that the Museum would like to have a dedicated quiet space. In addition, staff 
time and funds to carry out many of their inclusion related objectives is a challenge. 
They have kept their resources and inclusion efforts in line with what other museums 
are already doing but are not sure they have the resources to analyze what they are 
currently doing to make sure it is effective. Finally, finding the right way to approach 
people and talk about inclusion can be difficult. They note that it can be difficult to talk 
about disabilities with families as it feels like a sensitive topic; it’s a challenge to have 
meaningful conversations in the moment.  
Portland Children’s Museum 
 
Portland Children’s Museum is a non-profit children’s museum focused on 
inquiry-based learning strategies. The Museum is located in Portland, Oregon. Portland 
Children’s Museum has 34 employees, 18 of whom work 30 hours or more. Their 
mission is to “develop innovative problem-solvers through playful learning experiences 
that strengthen relationships between children and their world (Portland Children’s 
Museum 2018).” The Museum is home to Opal Beginning School, a tuition-based early 
childhood program for children ages three to five, and Opal Charter School, a public 
elementary school serving children in grades K-5. In addition, the Portland Children’s 
Museum Center for Learning documents the work of Opal School and provides 
professional development opportunities to educators from around the world. Over 
290,000 people experienced the Museum in fiscal year 2016-2017. Portland Children’s 
Museum has over 80,000 sq. ft. of indoor and outdoor exhibit space combined.  

67 
 
The representative interviewed from Portland Children’s Museum was Stephanie 
Madrid, Community Engagement Manager. In her role, Stephanie is responsible for 
helping bridge any gaps that keep people in Portland from visiting the Museum (e.g. 
language, transportation, disability, financial aid, etc.). For example, she coordinates 
offsite programs with non-English speaking communities, refugees and immigrants, and 
children and adults with disabilities. She oversees the Museum’s Access Program and 
Community Partners Program which offer reduced-price access to the Museum for 
families who receive state assistance and partner organizations who serve families or 
children who have significant barriers to accessing the Museum.  
Portland Children’s Museum notes their commitment to a neurodiverse audience 
within the following statement, “Portland Children’s Museum meets the requirements of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), but for us accessibility means more than 
compliance with the law of the land. We are committed to making the Museum a rich 
and rewarding experience for all, regardless of any specific needs they may have 
(Ibid).” Stephanie noted that the Museum has daily programming that is centered 
around a monthly theme and facilitated by their floor staff; these activities are usually 
sensory or STEM - based. Currently, she is working to find grant funding to support the 
purchase of adaptable technology and resources for these programs. The Museum 
works diligently to provide accommodations during field trips and camps. They currently 
offer a variety of accessibility resources including: headphones, weighted vests, 
feelings/actions charts, and timers. She is also working on a social narrative about 
visiting the Museum. Stephanie feels that if children are practicing and utilizing these 
tools and strategies in school, it is also helpful to have them at the Museum. In addition 

68 
 
to accessibility resources, the Museum provides monthly Access Play events for 
families with children experiencing disabilities and their friends.  
Access Play events are featured as a low sensory playtime with less crowds and 
minimal stress. These events are offered for free in partnership with FACT (Family and 
Community Together), Autism Society of Oregon, Swindell’s Resource Center, in 
addition to other partners. Access Play occurs on Tuesday evenings from 5:30-7:00 
p.m. Special programming has included therapy dogs and sensory activities. Stephanie 
is working to find art therapists who are willing to donate their time at the event. Access 
Play has about 70 visitors per event. While they have a lot of repeat visitors for this 
event, it has gotten mixed reviews because of timing and location. Stephanie noted that 
evening traffic and the Museum’s location outside of the city may present barriers for 
families to attend. In addition to Access Play events, Portland Children’s Museum also 
partners with FACT for a special holiday program. FACT is a family leadership 
organization that strives to strengthen and connect individuals and families experiencing 
disabilities. They work collaboratively to “facilitate positive change in policies, systems, 
and attitudes through family support, advocacy, and partnerships (FACT 2018).” FACT 
Santa is a free, low-sensory event that invites families with children experiencing 
disabilities to meet Santa in a low-pressure environment. At the event, Santa is 
presented in a different way; casually walking around the Museum instead of the 
traditional sit on Santa’s lap experience. Stephanie said that children often feel more 
comfortable during this event because they recognize representatives from the FACT 
organization and other families at the event. This event had 300 attendees in 2017, but 
attendance was still low enough to resemble a sensory event.  

69 
 
In Stephanie’s opinion, everyone at the Museum is open to figuring out how the 
Museum can serve individuals with disabilities. For example, she has served on exhibit 
design committees to ensure voices from this community are heard. While she noted 
that it is difficult to be completely thoughtful in including every person at the Museum, 
listening to communities and individuals is the most important thing the Museum can do; 
sharing their personal stories is a way the Museum can create relationships with people 
and get their insight into how the Museum can serve them best. 
Madison Children’s Museum 
 
Madison Children’s Museum is a non-profit organization located in Madison, 
Wisconsin. The Museum’s mission is to “[connect] children with their families, their 
communities, and the world beyond through discovery learning and creativity play 
(Madison Children’s Museum 2018).” Each year, over 200,000 people experience the 
Museum through visitation and onsite/offsite programs. The Museum has over 65 staff, 
a majority of which are part-time positions. The Museum’s 26,000 sq. ft. of public space 
is home to exhibits that foster discovery learning and creative play with a sustainability 
focus. The representative interviewed for Madison Children’s Museum was Sandra 
Bonnici, Associate Director of Education, Diversity, and Inclusion.  
 
According to Sandra, the Museum sees inclusion as both an organizational and 
individual journey. She noted that inclusion extends beyond disability and covers a 
broad spectrum of diversity. Staff receive ongoing training about Access, Diversity, 
Equity, and Inclusion. The Museum names inclusiveness as one of their core values. 
Madison Children’s Museum identifies their five commitments to be an inclusive 
organization as:  

70 
 
• Listen to our communities’ hopes, dreams, and needs so that we, working 
together, manifest our greatest strengths as a community. 
• Practice diversity and equity in our organization through recruiting, retaining, and 
valuing diverse volunteers, staff, and board members, which ensures innovation 
and sustainability of the organization well into the future. 
• Create inclusive communities through exhibits, programs, policies, facilities, and 
partnerships that reflect and celebrate our rich differences and common goals. 
• Strengthen children’s abilities to create and problem-solve together, through 
play, in order for them to succeed in an increasingly diverse and global society. 
• Foster empathy for children and families where everyone is accepted for their 
unique interests and abilities. (Ibid) 
 
Sandra’s role is to ensure everyone is vetting their work through Universal Design. The 
Museum takes a team approach to inclusion. They have a dedicated board committee 
and diagonal staff committee (a representative of every department) that considers 
inclusion as an overarching initiative. These committees help set goals for the institution 
regarding access, diversity, equity, and inclusion. According to Sandra, the Museum 
has a lens of Universal Design, so thinking about children with disabilities during 
program planning and design is almost an automated process. She notes that thinking 
about young visitors and what they need, usually works well for accessibility too.  
 
Over the past two years, Madison Children’s Museum began a new initiative to 
further engage and include families experiencing ASD and other sensory challenges. 
They established a coalition of experts, partners, teachers, caregivers, and agencies to 
help guide the Museum’s inclusion efforts for this audience. Sandra noted that the most 
crucial part of collaborating with this coalition was asking what their hopes and 
aspirations were in terms of their community. The Museum wanted insight into what this 
audience needed on a grander scale and was very careful not to microfocus. In turn, 
they received higher level feedback and strategic practices that would benefit all 
visitors. As a part of this initiative, the Museum collaborated with the Ausderau 

71 
 
Research Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, to develop an evaluation 
toolkit that can support public institutions that wish to increase accessibility and 
inclusion for children with ASD and/or sensory processing challenges. Sandra identifies 
the evaluation toolkit and the evidence-based work with their community as one of the 
Museum’s greatest accomplishments regarding accessibility and inclusion for children 
with ASD.  
The Museum provides resources and programs that help make the Museum 
experience more inclusive for individuals with ASD. They offer various sensory tools 
(fidget toys, timers, and headphones), low-sensory alternatives (e.g. hand towels in their 
bathrooms as an alternative to noisy dryers), and a quiet room. There is signage located 
at the Museum’s front desk to let visitors know that resources are available. Sandra 
noted that for this audience it is important to reduce the number of factors that create 
unpredictability. Sensory-Friendly Museum Times are a way for families to experience 
the Museum in a more predictable environment, while building comfort in the exhibit 
areas that will support future visits. Sensory-Friendly Museum Times occur monthly on 
Monday evenings from 5-7 p.m. The Museum makes modifications to the environment, 
in addition to their usual inclusion efforts, to make it more accessible and enjoyable for 
children with ASD and sensory issues. For example, signage is posted around the 
Museum to designate quiet zones and sensory-seeking areas. In addition, exhibits that 
produce light, sound, and video are turned off for this event. Support for Sensory-
Friendly Museum Time is provided by Achieving Collaborative Treatment (ACT), a local 
autism therapy provider. 

72 
 
 
Madison Children’s Museum does not have a specialized camp program for 
children with ASD. However, the Museum does provide a specialized resource camp 
instructor that is trained to work with audiences who have special needs. According to 
Sandra, it is helpful to have someone who can identify strategies to utilize during camps 
when needed. In addition, they have designed their camp registration forms to prompt 
caregivers to identify how their child might behave under certain conditions, “My child 
might do this if they are stressed…” This is helpful information for providing a 
comfortable environment for all children.  
 
Sandra identified money as the greatest barrier to accessibility and inclusion for 
children with ASD; having the financial resources to implement and support the best 
practices in reducing barriers to this audience is a challenge for most museums. 
Currently, funding and support for these initiatives comes from fundraising, grants, and 
the partners that make up the ASD coalition. The Museum’s ability to collaborate on a 
large scale and make inclusion a priority is essential to combating this barrier.  
Conclusion 
Peer museum interviews were conducted with staff from non-profit, children’s 
museums from across the United States to identify shared obstacles in providing 
inclusive experiences for children with ASD. Another goal of the peer museum 
interviews was to develop some helpful insights and effective practices that museums 
can engage in to move further towards inclusion. The majority of interviewed staff from 
peer museums (and the study site) had a dedicated inclusion statement and/or 
identified inclusion as one of their core values. In addition, some of the museums had 
dedicated staff committees specifically organized to discuss inclusion, diversity, equity, 

73 
 
and accessibility at their organization (e.g. the study site, ¡Explora!, and Madison 
Children’s Museum). While all of the institutions identified themselves as open-ended or 
hands-on learning institutions, two of them specifically referenced the use of Universal 
Design strategies (e.g. Madison Children’s Museum and Kohl Children’s Museum). 
These two institutions identified these specific design strategies as integral forces in the 
creation of exhibits and programming, noting that using a Universal Design lens helped 
ease the process of making their programs inclusive to a broad audience. 
Many of the museums identified busier, more crowded times in the museum as a 
barrier to individuals with ASD. The remaining museums noted having or wanting a 
space that a visitor could access if they needed a break from sensory input.  As a result 
of this common environmental barrier, all of the museums interviewed offer accessibility 
resources and dedicated sensory-friendly hours at their institution. Only one institution 
claimed to have a dedicated sensory-friendly exhibit (e.g. Wow! Children’s Museum). In 
addition, only one of the institutions (e.g. ¡Explora!) identified as having a specially 
designed program (outside of accessibility events) for children with autism spectrum 
disorder. In addition, funding, time, and space were identified as common barriers 
across many of the organizations including the study site. Community partners were 
noted as utilized solutions or potential ways to rectify some of these issues.  
All of the organizations identified ongoing relationships with community partners 
as being pertinent to their current inclusion efforts. This was the strongest correlation 
between the peer museum institutions. Community partners helped the organizations 
with a variety of tasks, including: developing accessibility resources, obtaining funding 
for inclusion efforts, training staff, providing additional support during programs, 

74 
 
planning and evaluating exhibit design, and serving on dedicated committees. The 
study site also has relationships with several community partners that are involved in 
efforts related to children with ASD. Continuing to nurture and invest in these 
relationships will be vital to the success of the study site’s inclusion efforts in the near 
future. 
The findings from peer museum interviews represented the experiences of 
museum professionals regarding their institution’s challenges and efforts towards 
providing an inclusive experience for children with ASD. These findings indicated that 
these institutions are implementing strategies like accessibility resources, special hours, 
and disability awareness trainings. However, many of these institutions have yet to 
implement specific design practices to create inclusive experiences in their daily 
programs and/or during general operating hours. This is an important area for focus as 
children with ASD should be supported on a consistent basis; their learning 
opportunities should not be limited to special visitation times. Many of these institutions, 
including the site Museum, identified time, funding, and space as substantial challenges 
to providing inclusive experiences for children with ASD. Institutions may find it 
beneficial to follow the example of the peer museums in cultivating relationships with 
community partners to overcome these challenges. In addition, some of these peer 
institutions made accessibility and inclusion a main priority in grant opportunities and 
funding initiatives. This commitment is crucial as it may help obtain the resources 
necessary to implement environmental modifications, provide additional training for 
staff, integrate inclusive practices in program design, and develop/purchase 
accessibility resources.  

75 
 
Chapter 5: SURVEY 
Introduction 
An Accessibility & Inclusion Survey was conducted with three main constituent 
groups: caregivers, teachers, and therapists. All participants have visited the Museum 
with children on the autism spectrum. The main purposes of the survey were to identify 
the participants’ motivations for visiting a children’s museum with a child or children with 
ASD, to identify the current barriers that exist within the study site’s environment and 
programs, and to identify what resources work best for creating a positive experience 
for the children before and during their visit. 
Protocol  
Potential survey participants were identified at Museum accessibility events and 
by communicating to autism resource centers in the community. Approximately 50 
individuals agreed to participate in the Accessibility & Inclusion Survey. This included 30 
representatives from museum accessibility programs and 20 staff members at a local 
resource center. Three autism resource centers in the surrounding community were 
asked to participate in the survey. One center replied to the survey request, and 
approximately 20 staff members were sent an invitation to participate in the Accessibility 
& Inclusion Survey via a staff member at the center. Of the 50 potential respondents, 13 
completed and submitted the survey (26%).  
Survey participants remained anonymous and were only asked to submit an 
email address using the Survey Participant Recruitment Flyer (Appendix C) and Survey 
Participant Sign-Up Form (Appendix D). Responses were kept secure on a password 
protected computer. In addition, responses were not connected to the respondents’ 

76 
 
email address to ensure responses remained anonymous. Before taking part in the 
survey, participants were asked to read a consent form (Appendix E). Survey questions 
included multiple choice, short answer, and topics rated on Likert scales. These 
questions were developed by the researcher for this study. Questions covered the 
following topics: 
• Basic information (child’s age and identified gender, survey participant’s  
relationship to the child, etc.) 
• Motivations for visiting a children’s museum 
• Tools, resources, and environmental modifications 
• Study Site Museum environment and programs 
 
For a complete list of survey questions, see Appendix F.  
 
After survey responses were collected, the data were examined to identify 
themes across participants’ responses. Basic information questions were used to 
identify which subject group was answering questions (caregivers, teachers, or 
therapists) and to evaluate whether specific themes existed across a subject group. For 
Likert scale responses, statements that were rated a 4 or 5 (Important or very important; 
helpful or very helpful), by at least 50% of respondents are considered especially 
relevant because of their perceived importance by a majority of the survey participants. 
Multiple choice questions had the option to fill in a unique answer by choosing “other”, in 
case the options provided did not adequately represent a participant’s view. Multiple 
choice questions helped identify logistical themes, such as preferred visitation times, 
whether visitors prepared prior to a visit, use of a museum’s web page for accessibility 
information, potential interest in classes/camps/programs, etc. Short answer questions 
were used to identify any motivations and tools/resources not mentioned in the survey 
that participants deemed significant. In addition, short answer questions allowed 

77 
 
participants a chance to identify motivations, tools/resources, and barriers that 
influenced their individual museum experience. 
Results 
Basic Information 
 
Each survey respondent was asked to answer the questions about a child or 
children with ASD that they have a relationship to.  Out of thirteen responses, seven 
children were identified as male, two children were identified as female, and four 
respondents identified themselves as working with both male and female children as 
therapists, teachers, or service providers. Interestingly, even though the Museum’s 
target age is zero to ten years, only five children were identified as falling within that age 
range. The other eight responses identified children age twelve to eighteen. Most of 
these latter responses came from either teachers or therapists.  
 
Of the survey respondents, five individuals identified as therapists, five were 
caregivers, two were teachers, and one identified as a specialized program provider. 
“Specialized program provider” was a written-in response. All respondents identified the 
child or children as having been diagnosed with ASD. One hundred percent of 
respondents said the child or children have visited a children’s museum in the past, 
indicating a familiarity with this type of informal learning environment.  
Motivations 
 
Respondents were asked to rate a series of statements regarding motivations for 
visiting a children’s museum with a child diagnosed with ASD, from (1) not important to 
(5) very important. Motivation statements that received a score of 4 (important) or 5 
(very important) for at least 50% of the respondents will be evaluated below for insight 

78 
 
as to why these subject groups visit a children’s museum with a child or children with 
ASD.  Eight out of the eleven suggested statements fell within this criterion:  
● To be entertained. 76.9% 
● To spend quality time with classmates, family, and/or friends. 84.6% 
● To interact in an unfamiliar and/or stimulating environment. 77% 
● To learn or to be mentally stimulated. 69.3% 
● To have a change in the child’s daily routine. 53.9% 
● To connect the child to an area of their interest. 61.6% 
● To introduce the child to other children who do not have ASD or other disabilities. 
53.9% 
● To introduce the child to children who do have ASD or other disabilities. 53.9% 
 
Results show that respondents mainly see a children’s museum as an exciting or 
unfamiliar environment where the child can be entertained and spend time with 
classmates, family, and/or friends. Most respondents (69.3%) also felt motivated to visit 
a children’s museum for the child to be mentally stimulated and to learn, and to connect 
the child to an area of their interest (61.6%). Another set of motivations that related to 
social interaction was introducing the child to other children with (53.9%) and without 
(53.9%) ASD and/or other disabilities.  
Tools, Resources, and Environmental Modifications 
 
100% of respondents indicated that they prepare with the child prior to visiting a 
children’s museum. When asked how they prepare with the child, eight respondents 
mentioned the use of visual resources and tools such as: social narratives, videos, 
pictures, and/or picture schedules. Participants also mentioned that they prepare by 
having a conversation with the child about what to expect and/or what they are going to 
do during their visit, as shown in the following statements:  
● Tell him what to expect sensory wise. (caregiver) 
● Explain where we are going, what some things will be like, talk over how to handle 
stressful situations. (caregiver) 
 

79 
 
Most respondents (76.9%) indicated that they visit a museum’s website for accessibility 
information to prepare for a visit to a children’s museum. However, one caregiver 
responded that museum websites “are often not very helpful”, therefore they only utilize 
them “sometimes”.  
As with their motivations, survey participants were asked to rate a variety of 
tools, resources, and environmental modifications on a scale from (1) not helpful to (5) 
very helpful. The objective was to learn which of these were rated helpful or very helpful 
by 50% or more participants. However, all fifteen suggestions of tools, resources, and 
environmental modifications fell within these criteria. Each of these various tools, 
resources, and environmental modifications will be discussed in two ways: 
1. How and if they are currently offered by the Museum 
2. If they are not currently offered, how they can be implemented at the Museum 
 
Museum Environment & Programs 
 
When asked what aspects of the site Museum environment support a positive 
experience for the child with ASD, answers focused on staff, a variety of interactive 
experiences, and accessibility events and resources.  For example, staff were described 
as very understanding, helpful, friendly, and positive. These comments are celebratory 
of staff at the Museum. However, participants were not asked when these positive 
interactions with staff occurred. Therefore, they may have been reflecting on a visit to 
the Museum during a special accessibility event when the Museum is staffed with 
individuals who are especially informed about the needs of children with ASD. Or, they 
may have reflected on a group visit/field trip when staff was aware of a group’s potential 
accessibility needs prior to their visit. Unfortunately, participants’ views of Museum staff 

80 
 
may or may not represent how staff interact with this audience during a typical Museum 
visit.  
 
Participants mentioned that the variety of interactive experiences available at the 
Museum supported a positive experience for children with ASD. The bright colors, 
inviting exhibits, hands-on activities, variety of spaces, tactile exploration, exploratory 
areas, and the interactive quality of exhibits at the site museum were all revealed as 
positive qualities for respondents.  
 
Finally, participants mentioned various resources that the Museum offered which 
helped support a positive experience, including: dimmer lights, accommodations, 
change in lighting/sound, sensory room, quiet rooms, sensory supports, headphones, 
slant boards, and sensory sensitive areas. In addition to specific resources or 
environmental modifications, the benefits of accessibility events were also mentioned. 
One respondent who is a parent wrote, “The biggest help for us is having time set aside 
for special needs when the normal public is not there because crowds are 
overwhelming for my son and we are all able to relax and enjoy museums more without 
large crowds.”  
 
When participants were asked what aspects create barriers in the Museum’s 
environment, most of their responses related to large crowds and loud noise levels. One 
respondent who was a therapist mentioned a need for more quiet spaces to take the 
child when the environment is overstimulating. Although, not mentioned directly, the 
optimal times for groups with ASD to visit the Museum, especially when considering 
families, do not correlate well with the Museum’s operating hours/busy periods. For 
example, 100% of parents/guardians identified weekend afternoons or evenings to be 

81 
 
the optimal time for a visit to the Museum. However, attendance numbers rise greatly on 
weekends, which can create large crowds and a loud environment not conducive to a 
positive experience for children with ASD. In addition, the Museum is only open until 
5:00 PM on Saturdays and Sundays, which does not help families who may only be 
able to visit on weekend evenings; potentially interfering with a caregiver’s work 
schedule. 100% of teachers and therapists identified weekdays as an optimal time to 
visit the Museum, especially during the morning or afternoon. These subject groups 
may have limitations on their visitation time due to the restraints of therapy or school 
hours, however weekdays tend to be less busy times at the Museum.  
 
Participants varied in their response when asked what amount of time the child is 
comfortable participating in the museum environment. However, most respondents 
(77%) indicated that the child could spend approximately 30 minutes to 1.5 hours in an 
environment like the Museum.  
 
When asked if the child has participated in any classes, camps, and/or programs 
at the Museum, most respondents (69.2%) said the child had not participated but would 
be interested. Three respondents (23.1%) representing each of the subject groups 
(caregiver, teacher, and therapist) said that the child has no interest in participating in a 
class, camp, or program at the Museum. Only one participant, who was a therapist, 
stated that the child had participated and would be interested in another program in the 
future. Some identified aspects that could be a barrier to participating in this setting 
included: being with non ASD peers, the usual lack of supports that would accompany 
such a program, noise, change in routine, large environment, loud noises, the need for 
extra staff support, and not being able to participate with the child due to other 

82 
 
commitments, like younger siblings. Most participants (41.7%) indicated that the child 
would be comfortable participating in a class, camp, or program for between 30 minutes 
to 1 hour.  Many of the teachers and therapists felt that questions related to participating 
in a class, camp, or program did not apply to their relationship with the child. This may 
result from these individuals perceiving classes, camps, or programs as activities that 
would take place outside of a school field trip or therapy session (e.g. with a child’s 
caregiver). Therefore, answers regarding some of the questions about participating in 
classes, camps, and programs were largely varied and no themes could be identified. 
Topics of interest that were identified in the form of short answer response included: 
water and anything in motion; gross motor, movement, play, social interaction; sensory 
exploration, simple crafts; technology, engineering/design; and books, music. 
Conclusion 
Survey results indicated that most respondents saw a children’s museum as an exciting 
or unfamiliar environment where the child can be entertained and spend time with 
classmates, family, and/or friends. In addition, participants were motivated to visit a 
children’s museum for the child to learn and connect to an area of their interest. A 
variety of tools, resources, and modifications were identified as helpful by participants. 
The benefit of having accessibility tools, environmental modifications, and designated 
sensory-friendly events were all highlighted by participants as helpful for creating a 
positive experience for the child. Participants felt that large crowds and noise level were 
a significant barrier to the child’s positive Museum experience. Most respondents stated 
that the child had not participated in any classes, camps, and/or programs at the 
Museum--but would be interested. Perceived barriers to their participation included 

83 
 
unknown environmental factors and the need for additional support during such a 
program if their caregiver was not present. Free, daily programming opportunities such 
as Storytime, Music Time, and a visit to the Art Studio, with the proper planning and 
facilitation, are opportunities for children with ASD to engage in at the Museum. These 
programs occur in designated program spaces that could serve as an escape from 
crowded or noisy exhibits. In addition, they have the potential to be hands-on 
experiences with a designated timeframe and a supportive structure that serves this 
audience.  
 

84 
 
Chapter 6: OBSERVATION  
Introduction 
A series of unobtrusive observations took place over six weeks from December 
2017 through January 2018, for a total of 21.5 hours. Observations focused on daily 
programming at the Museum during normal museum hours and museum accessibility 
events. The purpose of these observations was to identity aspects of these programs 
that could support a positive or negative experience for children with ASD. Visitors 
themselves were not the primary focus of these observations, rather the focus was to 
observe how aspects of the programs (including staff facilitation) and environment 
affected the experience of visitors.  
Daily programs are open format programs that are offered at no additional cost to 
visitors. Programs include Storytime, Music Time, Block Building, and an Art Studio. 
These programs are facilitated by staff in order to actively engage the Museum’s young 
visitors (birth-8+) and their caregivers during the program; creating opportunities for 
families to play and learn together. Visitors are welcome to listen, watch, and participate 
for as long as they like. The Public Programs Coordinator is responsible for the creation, 
implementation, revision, and evaluation of daily programming at the Museum. These 
daily programs are facilitated by Play Facilitators and Lead Learning Labs and Play 
Facilitators.  
Storytime 
Storytime is a daily program at the Museum that provides children and their families 
interactive experiences to explore literature. The program is provided seven days per 
week, two to three times per day. The goal of Storytime is to give children and their 
families the opportunity to explore literature in a variety of ways and introduce this 

85 
 
audience to a variety of children’s books. In addition, Storytime builds literacy, 
vocabulary, picture recognition, and more. Each session lasts approximately 20-30 
minutes and is facilitated by a Play Facilitator or Lead Learning Labs and Play 
Facilitator. The books read during Storytime change each session and cover a range of 
subjects.  
Music Time 
Music Time is a daily program at the Museum that provides children and their 
families interactive experiences to explore music concepts and engage in joyful 
movement. The goal of Music Time is to introduce children and their families to a wide 
range of music concepts and give them the opportunity to explore movement in a 
variety of ways. Music Time can build fine and gross motor skills, vocabulary, literacy, 
and more. The program is provided seven days per week, one to two times per day. 
Each session lasts approximately 20-30 minutes and is facilitated by a Play Facilitator 
or Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitator. The content for each session changes daily 
and includes hands-on exploration of a variety of topics such as tempo, pitch, dance, 
rhythm, instruments, etc.  
Block Building 
Block Building was a daily program that encouraged children and their adults to play in 
the Museum’s unit block area. This program was provided seven days per week, one to 
two times per day. Each session lasted approximately 20-30 minutes and was hosted 
by a member of the Museum’s Play Facilitation team (as mentioned above, this program 
was discontinued shortly after the completion of these observations). By engaging in 

86 
 
Block Building, children developed skills in math, design, representation, balance, 
stability, shapes, vocabulary, sorting, and more.  
Art Studio 
The Art Studio is a free, drop-in workspace that engages children and their 
families in creative activities that incorporate elements of art, math, and science. The 
goal of the Art Studio is to provide children and their families a creative outlet where 
they can explore a variety of media in an open-ended environment. Participating in the 
Art Studio can help children build fine and gross motor skills, color/shape/pattern 
recognition, vocabulary, cooperation skills, and more. The Art Studio generally offers a 
unique theme or projects each week that are designed by the Art and Maker Specialist 
and facilitated by the Museum’s Play Facilitation team. In addition, tables for drawing 
and sensory play are usually available. The Art Studio is open seven days per week; it 
opens 30 minutes after the Museum and closes 30 minutes prior to the Museum.  
Sensory Story & Play Time 
Sensory Story & Play Time is a specialized program offered during the Museum’s 
two accessibility programs, Third Thursdays and Family Night Out. This program is 
facilitated by an area educator who has experience working with children with autism 
spectrum disorders in both formal and informal learning environments. The goal of 
Sensory Story & Play Time is to offer children with disabilities and their families a more 
flexible, judgement free story time environment with an environment and resources that 
support a positive experience. Each session lasts approximately 30-45 minutes and 
includes interactive stories, songs, movement, and more.  
 

87 
 
Protocol 
Each daily program was observed during the Museum’s normal operating hours. 
Sensory Story & Play Time was observed during the Museum’s accessibility programs. 
Observations were made using an Observation Worksheet (see Appendix E). 
Observations focused on: basic information about the participants, staff facilitation, 
activities, motivations, and tools/resources/modifications. Basic information gathered 
about participants included the number of participants, observed gender, and 
approximate age range. In addition, the following was recorded during observation:  
how participants (including staff and visitors) interacted during the program, vocalized 
statements that reflected the program’s activities or environment, and the tools that 
were observed during a program. Areas of need for specific tools, resources, and/or 
modifications that could be identified through observation were also noted. All program 
participants (including staff and visitors) remained anonymous during the observation; 
no identifying information was collected. An informational flyer (Appendix F) was 
provided prior to each observation, and participation was voluntary for both staff and 
visitors. Potential participants (including staff and visitors) were asked to inform the 
researcher if they did not want to be observed.  
After observation data was collected, observations were organized by program 
type. Each observation was conducted with the following questions in mind:  
● Did participants mention their motivation for participating in the program? 
● What types of sensory stimuli were present during the program? Could the 
amount of sensory information observed be overwhelming for visitors with 
sensory processing difficulties?  
● What potential barriers (logistical, environmental, social) were present in the 
environment or program? What accommodations or changes could be made to 
reduce or eliminate these barriers.  

88 
 
● What tools and resources are present in the program or environment that may be 
helpful for children with ASD? Which tools and resources, identified in survey 
responses and research, are absent but could be incorporated into the program 
or environment?  
 
Findings  
Storytime 
 
Observed ages for participants of Storytime included children infant to twelve 
years old, and adults age 20 to 65 years old. The average number of participants during 
Storytime was six children and five adults. The lowest attendance observed was one 
child and one adult. The highest attendance observed was twelve children and ten 
adults. 
The environment for Storytime remained consistent throughout multiple 
observations (see Figure 4.1). During each observation, the program took place in a 
multi-purpose room that also serves as a rotating gallery of artwork from area schools. 
The room is adjacent to a popular museum neighborhood that houses exhibits based on 
light, shadow, and color. These exhibits tended to be noisy and sound travelled easily 
through the open doors of the multi-purpose room during Storytime. During multiple 
observations, the reader was difficult to hear over the sounds in the adjacent exhibits. 
The room was bright with the use of both fluorescent and LED track lighting.  
 
 

89 
 
Figure 6.1: Gallery Space 
The room setup was simple. Two long plastic benches provided minimal seating, 
appropriate for no more than six to eight individuals. A single chair was available for the 
reader, located in front of a large screen used to project pages from some of the books 
utilized during the program. Books were usually stacked on the floor or were 
occasionally spread out in front of the audience. During the program, children sat on the 
benches or on the floor in front of the reader’s chair. Adults utilized the benches for 
seating when possible or stood around the perimeter of the room. During one of the 
observed sessions, the reader provided small pillows covered in various textures. 
Children used the pillows to make themselves more comfortable, by sitting or lying on 
them; some held the pillows in their hands or played with them during the stories.  

90 
 
There was an observed pattern to the program. First the staff member set up the 
room by selecting four to five books from a nearby storage room and placing a program 
sign outside the room. Then, they sat in the room and waited for participants to arrive or 
walked through the adjacent exhibit and told visitors about the upcoming program. At 
the start time of the program, the staff member welcomed the participants. Next, staff 
members chose a book or asked the children to select a book. Books for this program 
tended to be large picture books, written for preschool age readers. There was a 
projection screen located on the wall behind the staff member. Occasionally, the screen 
was used to project digital versions of the books. However, a few staff had difficulty 
using the technology and chose not to use it during the program. Many of the staff 
members used changes in their voice, sound effects, and questions to keep visitors 
attentive:  
● Do you want to roar with me?  
● What does a wolf say? 
● What is he going to do next? 
 
Some participants seemed to lose interest after one or two stories and played with the 
books on the ground, glanced around the room, or moved around in their seat. Once a 
book was finished, the reader moved on to another selection, until the 20 minutes were 
up, and the program was over. The staff member made an announcement to the 
participants to signify that the program was over, such as:  
● Thank you so much for joining us for Storytime. It is over now. 
● That’s all the books we have time for today. Thank You! 
 
Participants then left the room and continued their visit. The reader put the supplies 
away and continued their shift elsewhere in the Museum.  
 

91 
 
Music Time 
The participants of Music Time appeared to be children age infant to seven years 
old, and adults age from 16 to 65 years old. The average number of participants during 
Music Time was ten children and nine adults. Not all participants stayed for the entire 20 
minutes.  
The environment for Music Time remained consistent throughout multiple 
observations (see Figure 6.1). This program took place in the same multi-purpose room 
as Storytime and had a similar setup. Two long plastic benches provided a small 
amount of seating, appropriate for no more than six to eight individuals, and a single 
chair was available for the staff person or volunteer. A plastic bin full of instruments was 
placed on the floor or bench. On one occasion, a staff person also provided music cards 
printed with simple rhythms and songs. A standing program sign was placed outside of 
the program room. 
The observed Music Times were chaotic. As participants walked into the 
program, they were invited to pick an instrument from the bin. The doors to the multi-
purpose room remained open during the program, which filled the room with competing 
sounds from the adjacent exhibits. Once participants picked their instruments (e.g. 
cymbals, gongs, boom whackers, shakers, maracas, etc.), the noise level in the room 
grew tremendously. Some visitors appeared to become overwhelmed by the noise and 
left prior to the end of the program. Many of the staff members observed appeared to 
find it difficult to maintain a structure during the program, and their attempts to guide the 
group of children in an activity (after they had begun playing their instrument) was 
almost impossible.   

92 
 
Adults encouraged the children to play instruments by demonstrating certain 
rhythms or motions. Instead of playing as one cohesive group, program participants 
tended to split into small groups that played amongst their family or friends. Children 
and adults walked around the room with instruments, sat in the center of the room, or 
spread out around the perimeter of the room. The program ended when the staff person 
collected the instruments from the group and thanked them for participating.  
Block Building 
Child participants for Block Building appeared to range in age from one to seven 
years old, and adults appeared to range in age from 20 to 65 years old. The average 
number of participants observed during Block Building was seven children and four 
adults. The lowest attendance observed was five children and one adult. The highest 
attendance observed was twelve children and seven adults. The observed Block 
Building programs usually had one facilitator, a Play Facilitator or Lead Learning Labs 
and Play Facilitators. Occasionally, a volunteer was also present during the program.  

93 
 
Block Building took place on the second level of the Museum in the unit block 
area (see Figure 6.2). The unit block area occupies a small recessed area in an exterior 
wall; approximately 8 ft. deep and 10 ft. wide. Two arc-shaped benches flank the 
entrance to the unit block area. The perimeter of the unit block area contains three walls  
Figure 6.2 Unit Block Area 
of shelving that hold unit blocks and large wooden rulers. The area is carpeted and lit by 
a unit of LED track lights; the lighting is dimmer on this level of the museum due to the 
use of more natural lighting (skylights) and LED track lighting. The noise level in this 
space was largely dependent on the number of visitors on the second level. This small 
area is adjacent to a space for temporary, rotating exhibitions. At the time the 

94 
 
observations described here were conducted, an interactive exhibit based on the 
combination of art and music was on display. This temporary exhibit had the potential to 
produce a lot of sound due to the presence of instruments and audio/visual 
components.  
No repeated structure to this program was observed. The program differed 
during each observation depending on the participants and their actions. The unit block 
area is always available to visitors regardless of whether a specialized program is taking 
place, therefore there was no obvious beginning or end to the Block Building program. 
The program “began” when a facilitator entered the area and began interacting with 
visitors, and it “ended” when that facilitator exited the area and continued their shift 
elsewhere.  
The small size of the unit block area influenced how visitors participated in this 
program. The blocks were available for children to work independently or together. 
Many children began to build independently in the area but ended up building with 
others because of the lack of available space. When several children worked 
independently in the space or built a large collaborative project, there was not much 
room left to move around the space easily. During one observation, a child was 
observed playing with blocks on top of the shelving because the space on the floor was 
covered with the projects of other children. During another observation, a child took 
blocks out of the unit block area into an adjacent exhibit area because of the lack of 
building space. After removing the blocks, the child continued to play independently 
outside of the block area. In addition, on a separate occasion, adult participants made 
comments that reflected the stress brought on by a small, crowded exhibit space:  

95 
 
● If you are going to knock it down, do it towards the corner. (to avoid hitting other 
children in the space) 
● There are a hundred blocks in here. I don’t understand why they can’t play with 
different blocks. (comment made after a couple of children unknowingly took 
apart her child’s structure) 
 
The facilitator (and occasional volunteer) sat in the unit block area and played 
alongside children in the space, both those who were playing independently and 
together. The facilitator used questions and statements to motivate participants during 
their building experience:   
● Are you going to keep helping us over here?  
● What are you going to build today? 
● What did you make?  
 
The facilitation during this program was limited to these interactions. Facilitators did not 
bring additional materials or activities into the unit block area during the program.  
 
Art Studio 
 
The Art Studio is a creative workspace that incorporates elements of art, math, 
science, among other activities. The observed participants appeared to include children 
ranging in age from infant to ten years old. Adult participants appeared to be between 
20 to 65 years old. An average of ten children and seven adults participated in the Art 
Studio during observations. The lowest number of participants was five children and two 
adults. The highest number of participants observed was fourteen children and thirteen 
adults.  
 
During each observation, the Art Studio had a set of activities available for 
visitors to explore. These activities were usually correlated around a theme for the day 
or week. For example, during one observation, participants could take part in drawing, 
weaving, collage-making, or a chalkboard activity. Activities were spaced around the 

96 
 
room at different stations. The floor plan was open to allow for easy movement between 
stations (see Figure 6.3). Tables were child height and allowed participants to stand or 
sit while taking part in the activity. Child-sized plastic stools and chairs were the two 
seating options available. For some stations, an example of related artwork was 
provided for inspiration by the Art and Maker Specialist who designs and plans each 
activity. The following tools and resources, that may have benefits for children with 
ASD, were utilized during observed activities:  
● Individual work trays that provide a structured space for the activity 
● Materials with various textures that provide a stimulating tactile experience 
o Feather boas, ribbons, and yarn 
o Clay and Mad Mattr® - a “super-soft building compound that easily molds 
and shapes into endless creations, inspiring open-ended play” (Relevant 
Play 2018)  
● Marker storage blocks and containers that help keep a creative space organized 
● Accessible scissors for individuals with dexterity issues 

97 
 
 
Figure 6.3 Art Studio  
 
There were no physical directions or guides provided for the activities. Verbal 
introductions about the theme or activity were given by staff when visitors entered the 
space. Staff and volunteers moved around the room and occasionally asked the visitors 
questions about their projects. However, staff and volunteers were also occupied with 
keeping the space tidy and materials replenished.  
Sensory Story & Play Time 
 
Sensory Story & Play Time occurred during the Museum’s two accessibility 
programs, Third Thursdays and Family Night Out. This program is facilitated by an area 
educator that teaches in a blended classroom at a public special education preschool. 

98 
 
The facilitator has experience working with children with autism spectrum disorder and 
other disabilities in both formal and informal education environments. In a past role as a 
specialized program provider at a grant-based organization for children with autism, she 
recognized that many of her clients could benefit from more creative, flexible, informal 
learning environments. In turn, she wanted to create a story time that was engaging and 
non-traditional, but also sensitive to a neurodiverse audience including children with 
autism. She thought that some families may not feel comfortable attending quieter, 
more regulated story times; because of the fear of having to conform their child’s 
behavior to this environment and the associated judgement that could arise from other 
participants. Therefore, she wanted to create a judgement-free story time with a flexible 
environment.  
In September 2016, she discovered the Museum’s accessibility programs online 
and thought they could be a great venue for her story time. She reached out to the 
Museum’s Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist, and in December 2016 she ran her first 
Sensory Story & Play Time at the Museum. The Museum gives her an outlet for her 
creativity and a place to provide families a more inclusive story time. She uses these 
activities in her classroom and shares them with her school’s librarians as well. When 
asked what she feels is the most vital aspect to this program, she stated that setting up 
a quality, supportive environment is crucial. She always uses a large rug, visual 
schedule, and interactive activities during Sensory Story & Play Time. She removes 
most of the standard seating in the room, so families can sit together on a communal 
rug. However, she notes that it is important to have some seating nearby for individuals 
that need it. In addition, she always has a backup plan or “bag of tricks” ready for when 

99 
 
things do not go as planned. For example, she keeps a small kit of wipes, single-use 
earbuds, and a tactile activity (e.g. small container of coins with a slotted lid) available 
during the program. Finally, she stated that it is important for facilitators to set a tone of 
non-judgement, by reminding parents that a program is flexible, their children do not 
have to remain seated, and that families can join or leave as they please.  
Currently, Sensory Story & Play Time is the only drop-in program specifically 
designed for children on the autism spectrum at the Museum. This program lasted 
longer than typical daily programs. Each observation for this program was 
approximately 30-45 minutes in length. Children who participated in this program 
appeared to range in age from two to fourteen; adults appeared to be between 30 to 50 
years old. An average of eight adults and eight children participated in the observed 
Sensory Story & Play Times.  

100 
 
 
Sensory Story & Play Time took place in the same location as Storytime and 
Music Time; however, the room setup was different (see Figure 6.4). A rug was 
provided in the center of the room for participants to sit on. There were additional 
seating options available including bean bag chairs, cube chairs, and benches. The 
doors to the room were closed to lessen auditory and visual distractions from the 
adjacent exhibit.  
Figure 6.4 Sensory Story & Play Time  
 
There was an evident structure and format to Sensory Story & Play Time. After 
welcoming participants as they entered the room, the instructor told participants it was 
“okay to wiggle, wander, or leave” to identify to caregivers that the program was flexible 
and non-judgmental. The facilitator then introduced a visual schedule that was used to 

101 
 
guide participants through the various parts of the program; to identify what had been 
completed and what was still to come.  
The visual schedule (see Figure 6.5) was simply constructed out of a rectangular 
piece of cardboard, approximately 3 feet tall, wrapped in fabric with a long, vertical strip 
of Velcro down the front. On top of the Velcro strip were laminated image cards that 
could be attached to the board with Velcro. A small baggy was attached to the back of 
the board to hold the image cards once they were removed after an activity.  
Figure 6.5: Visual Schedule  
The Facilitator used images from the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) 
to create the visual schedule.  PECS® is a unique alternative/augmentative 
communication system developed in the USA in 1985 by Andy Bondy, PhD, and Lori 
Frost, MS, CCC-SLP (Pyramid Educational Consultants, 2018). Augmentative and 

102 
 
Alternative Communication is “an area of clinical practice that addresses the needs of 
individuals with significant and complex communication disorders characterized by 
impairments in speech-language production and/or comprehension, including spoken 
and written modes of communication (ASHA, 2018).” Children with autism spectrum 
disorder may use the PECS® or other forms of AAC as a tool to help them 
communicate and develop language and literacy skills. AAC systems may involve a 
variety of techniques and tools, including picture communication boards, line drawings, 
speech-generating devices (SGDs), tangible objects, manual signs, gestures, and finger 
spelling (ASHA, 2018).  
The instructor facilitated the program utilizing the visual schedule. The first step 
on the schedule, an image of a person waving, was to conduct introductions between 
participants. The facilitator used a noisy pop tube to facilitate introductions. She began 
by demonstrating with her own introduction, and then asked each individual if they 
would like to participate before giving them the pop tube. Following the introduction 
activity, a participant was asked to remove that step from the visual schedule. For each 
activity that followed there was an image card, the facilitator gave clear instructions, and 
she provided expectations for appropriate use of materials (e.g. bean bags, blocks, 
activity supplies). Individuals participated in a variety of activities, including: reading a 
book, dancing, singing a song, playing with blocks, and playing with bubbles. Each 
activity involved participation from the group and incorporated movement and/or 
something tactile. For example, when a story was read it was accompanied by an 
activity. Even though the activities varied, the structure of the program and use of the 
visual schedule remained. The last image on the visual schedule, an image of a person 

103 
 
waving, indicated to the group that the program was over. The facilitator supported this 
verbally as she removed the last image from the visual schedule.  
Conclusion 
 
The Museum’s current daily programs, especially Storytime and Music Time, 
lacked depth in the variety of activities/content explored and exhibited a poor-quality 
environment. It is important to note that this is likely the result of insufficient training of 
Play Facilitation staff, not the fault of the facilitators themselves. While some structure 
was observed because of actions and verbal cues from the facilitator, there was no 
visual representation of the structure of the program made visible to visitors. In addition, 
the gallery space lacked an adequate amount and variety of seating for participants 
during both Storytime and Music Time. Both Storytime and Music Time lacked variety in 
the activities presented during these programs. Storytime consisted of reading various 
books to participants without much interaction between facilitator and the audience. 
Music Time appeared to be the most challenging for staff to facilitate effectively and 
tended to result in a chaotic and harsh auditory environment. Block Building appeared 
to be the easiest for staff to facilitate; most likely attributed to the fact that staff facilitate 
this area/activity outside of daily programming. However, no structure was made 
apparent to visitors. In turn, there may have been a lack of value attributed by visitors to 
this program as it was indifferent to what already occurred throughout the day in that 
exhibit area. While there was no consistent structure or time frame to the Art Studio, it 
offered much more variety in terms of the activities available to participants, seating 
options, and hands-on experiences. However, additional training would be helpful in 
guiding staff to focus on facilitation in addition to upkeep of the space. Finally, Sensory 

104 
 
Story & Play Times were the most interactive of the daily programs—in terms of staff 
and participant interaction and hands-on experiences. The visual schedule utilized 
during this program provided a physical representation of the program’s structure and 
helped participants know what to expect during the program. There were multiple 
options for seating and a flexible, welcoming environment was shared more fully to 
participants than during the daily programs delivered in that space.  
 
 

105 
 
Chapter 7: DISCUSSION 
Introduction 
Findings from this study identified various aspects of the delivery of these 
museum programs that influence each of the three contexts involved in creating a 
learning environment: personal, social, and physical (Falk and Dierking, 1992). In 
addition, the findings from this study will be used to craft recommendations for 
improvements to the site Museum’s daily programming, making them more inclusive to 
a neurodiverse audience. It is crucial for the site Museum to dedicate time and funding 
to properly train their staff who design and facilitate daily programming. Providing 
training related to disability awareness, program facilitation, and Universal Design for 
Learning Guidelines, may help make their current daily program offerings more inclusive 
to children with ASD. Finally, the Museum should continue to develop and maintain 
relationships with community partners that represent these audiences since they are 
integral to the planning and implementation of the programs and provide expertise that 
the staff may lack. By doing this, the Museum may be able to dissolve many of the 
barriers that prevent successful program development and delivery for individuals with 
ASD.   
Personal Context 
The personal context is an individual’s experiences and knowledge, and includes 
their interests, motivations, and concerns. This is the context the visitor brings into the 
museum and is the basis for which that individual experiences the Museum’s exhibits 
and builds upon their existing knowledge. Findings from this study show that caregivers, 
teachers, and therapists are motivated to visit the children’s museum environment 
mainly to spend time in an exciting or unfamiliar environment where a child with ASD 

106 
 
can be entertained, spend time with classmates, family, and/or friends, and potentially 
learn or be mentally stimulated. These motivations were represented in the following 
comments given by survey respondents when asked why they visit a children’s 
museum:    
● A fun, family outing 
● To put a smile on his face. 
● Same reasons I visit with my neurotypical children…for a new, enjoyable 
experience where they might learn. 
 
These responses reinforce the idea that children’s museums are regarded as informal 
learning institutions that are socially interactive, open-ended environments for play and 
learning. Another study, conducted in 2011 by the Smithsonian Institution and the 
Information Policy and Access Center at the University of Maryland, showed similar 
findings, when they examined why families with ASD visit museums, noting that the 
“museum experience emerged for families as a way to encourage the child’s 
independence in exploring and experiencing, to foster her/his interests and to share 
enthusiasm for learning with their child (Langa et al. 2013).” One respondent, from the 
current Accessibility and Inclusion Survey, commented specifically on why interacting in 
an unfamiliar and/or stimulating environment was very important, stating that they are 
motivated to visit the children’s museum to work on “building community skills, and how 
to appropriately behave in the community.” This also relates to the museum as a social 
environment that, when under the right conditions, may provide children with ASD an 
opportunity to work on improving their difficulties with social interaction. It is important to 
note that findings from the Accessibility and Inclusion Survey reflect the opinions of 
caregivers, teachers, and therapists versus the actual opinions of children with ASD. 
These individuals were utilized as a proxies for the actual children because of the 

107 
 
challenges of performing the survey with minors and the potential communication 
challenges presented by the disorder.  
Survey findings highlighted the importance of preparing children with ASD prior to 
their visit to a children’s museum; this is consistent with the findings of other studies 
(Langa et al. 2013; Ganz and Flores 2010). Developing web-based resources for 
visitors with ASD and other disabilities is essential as society becomes increasingly 
interwoven with technology. Providing accessibility information and resources on a 
museum’s website helps acclimate individuals who experience anxiety before visiting a 
museum, since new environments or changes in routine can cause stress among 
individuals with ASD. Museums should support visitors by devoting information on their 
website to accessibility and inclusion. This allows visitors to view the museum 
environment, create a plan for their visit, understand what accommodations are 
available, and set expectations for the child (Langa et al. 2013).  
Social Context 
The social context is whomever a visitor comes into contact within the museum 
(other visitors, family members, care providers, volunteers, staff members, etc.). The 
overall lack of structure observed in the daily programs, except for Sensory Story & Play 
Time, impacts the personal and social context for children with ASD. Children with ASD 
tend to benefit from programs that have some form of structure (Freed-Brown 2010). 
While individual components of a program can change, keeping the basic format of a 
program consistent is important for children with ASD.  
Most children participated successfully in the Sensory Story & Play Time due to a 
few key aspects of this accessibility program including the presence of a trained 

108 
 
facilitator, the use of a visual schedule or structured format, and the incorporation of a 
variety of resources and movement-based activities. The facilitator of the Sensory Story 
& Play Time was a trained specialized program provider who has experience working 
with children with ASD and other disabilities. Staff experience and training greatly 
influences the success of a program (Tyler 2015; Golden and Walsh 2013). Museum 
staff are often not equipped with the training or knowledge necessary to provide a 
positive, stress-free experience for children with ASD (Kulik and Fletcher 2016). The 
trained facilitator practiced many of the recommended (Meyer et al. 2016; Potter and 
Whittaker 2001) methods and techniques during Sensory Story & Play Time, including: 
● Using straightforward, uncomplicated language 
● Giving one instruction at a time instead of a sequence 
● Keeping facial expressions and gestures clear 
● Giving individuals time to respond 
● Using visual guides or cues 
● Creating situations that encourage movement and communication  
 
Most of these strategies for accommodating visitors with ASD were not a part of the 
other daily programs offered at the Museum. In addition, the use of a visual schedule 
during the program was beneficial for participants. Eight of the survey participants 
directly mentioned the use of visual aids before or during their visit to a children’s 
museum, and 92.3% of respondents rated these tools helpful or very helpful for the 
child. Not only did the visual schedule keep participants on task and motivated, but it 
also presented opportunities for each participant to interact one-on-one with the 
facilitator. 
 
Finally, the incorporation of a variety of movement-based activities was crucial to 
the success of Sensory Story & Play Time. Instead of participating in one activity for the 
entire program (e.g. listening to a book, playing an instrument, building with blocks, etc. 

109 
 
as was the case for the other daily programs) Sensory Story & Play Time involved the 
participants in a variety of activities. In addition, these activities supported the 
interaction between the participant and the instructor/facilitator or the other members of 
the group. For example, during one observation, a book about building a snowman was 
read to the group while they used pieces of felt to build a snowman together on the 
floor. During another observation, participants danced around the room and sang a silly 
song about bean bags that gave them specific actions to perform with actual bean bags 
that they each got to hold. These socially-interactive activities provide opportunities for 
children with ASD to work on their interpersonal communication skills. In addition, this 
type of interpersonal environment reflects the tenets of constructivism in relation to the 
adult-child learning partnership and the expanded learning that can take place when 
children learn alongside someone with an advanced level of knowledge (termed 
“scaffolding” as mentioned in Chapter 2).   
 
Setting up a supportive environment is another way that facilitators affect the 
quality of a learning environment. Facilitation staff should be trained on how to create a 
welcoming and comfortable learning environment for a neurodiverse audience. In 
addition, efficient organization of program content and supplies and suggestions for 
program lesson plans would be advantageous; helping to ensure staff feel supported 
when preparing for a program in a short period of time.  
Physical Context 
The physical context is the museum itself—the building, objects, environment—
what is to be explored and experienced by the visitor. When asked which aspects of the 
Museum created a negative experience for a child with ASD, many survey responses 

110 
 
described a common barrier across participants related to the physical context of the 
Museum:    
● The loud noises when crowded 
● Noise 
● The large spaces and loud noises could be overwhelming 
● No quiet space; need more spaces to take child to get out of stimulating 
environment 
● Crowded, noisy 
● Large environment, loud noises 
 
Several environmental barriers were also identified during observations including the 
bright lighting used in program spaces, excess noise present inside and outside of the 
program space, and a lack of resources to help individuals regulate their sensory input 
and processing issues (e.g. flexible seating, tactile resources, etc.).   
Providing a welcoming environment means anticipating the needs of visitors with 
ASD prior to their visit. The Museum should continue to expand their Accessibility & 
Inclusion webpage as new resources are identified and implemented. In addition, 
survey respondents indicated that a crowded, noisy museum can act as a barrier for a 
child with ASD. Museums may want to include a graphic on their website that details the 
expected attendance levels for the upcoming week due to group visits, holidays, etc.  
This would allow visitors with ASD to gauge how busy certain days would be and plan 
their visits during less busy hours. It may also be helpful for a museum’s front-line team 
to decide on a policy regarding refunds for guests who cannot carry out their visit or 
attend a program due to environmental barriers (e.g. crowds, noise, bright lights, etc.). 
Finally, museums should continue to develop programs and events that are designed to 
support visitors with ASD. Many museums utilize special events, classes, and camps to 
generate revenue. High attendance at these events can lead to great profits for a 

111 
 
museum, but poor experiences for visitors with ASD. Designing events that include 
special accessibility hours or private, affordable accessibility events can offer visitors 
with ASD the chance for a more positive experience. Creating flexible classes and 
camps that include resources and environmental considerations for children with ASD is 
also important. Museums should ensure that caregivers or therapists, that may have to 
attend with a child, receive free admission to the program.  
 
When asked to rate a list of suggested tools, resources, and environmental 
modifications from not helpful to very helpful, 100% of the 15 suggestions were 
identified as helpful or very helpful for children with ASD. Therefore, each of these ideas 
should be treated as significant in its potential to increase the inclusivity of the children’s 
museum visit. Suggested tools, resources, and environmental modifications included:  
● If available resources are listed online via museum website 
● Description of exhibits available online via museum website 
● Semi-private museum time (museum is closed to public, but open for children 
with disabilities and their families) 
● Inclusive educational programs (classes & camps designed specifically for 
children with disabilities) 
● Quiet rooms and/or spaces 
● Noise-reducing headphones 
● Timers, personal schedules, etc.  
● Stories, picture guides, etc.  
● Sensory maps that indicate areas with bright lights, loud noises, etc. 
● Recommendations for therapeutic uses of exhibit areas 
● Tactile, sensory, or fidget toys 
● Pressure vests, neck wraps, weighted blankets, or lap pads 
● Filtered lighting 
● Flexible seating (bean bag chairs, wobble seats, rocking chairs, etc.) 
● Service or comfort animals 
 
Fortunately, many of the above are already offered by the site Museum. However, some 
of the suggested tools, resources, and environmental modifications have yet to be 
implemented at the Museum but were recognized as necessary accommodations during 

112 
 
observations and by survey participants. Therefore, it is important to understand why 
and how these identified tools, resources, and environmental modifications could be 
implemented at the Museum to support visitors with ASD and their caregivers.  
Filtered lighting was identified as a helpful environmental modification for some 
individuals with ASD. The observed programming spaces, Art Studio, unit block area, 
and gallery space, utilized a combination of LED and fluorescent lighting. The unit block 
area (Block Building) generally exhibited lower light levels due to the use of LED track 
lights and natural lighting from a sky light. The Art Studio utilized LED lighting. The 
gallery space (Storytime and Music Time), used a combination of fluorescent and LED 
track lighting. Fluorescent lighting is commonly found in public spaces due to its 
reasonable price and efficient illumination. However, fluorescent lighting sources can 
emit a high level of illumination, humming sound, and flickering that some individuals 
with ASD may find discomforting (Long 2010). “In classrooms for students with ASD, 
brightness was a significant concern and one of the most frustrating conditions for the 
students (Long 2010).” Studies focused on creating ASD friendly classrooms have 
recommended the use of incandescent lighting, flexible LED lighting systems, 
fluorescent light filters, and natural lighting to create inclusive environments for 
individuals with ASD (Long 2010; McAllister, K. 2010; Woodcock, A. et al., n.d.). 
However, further research on the effects of different types of lighting and their 
cost/efficiency for institutions would be advantageous.  
 
Excess noise from surrounding exhibits and during Music Time was identified as 
a barrier during observations. Survey participants also mentioned a noisy atmosphere in 
their survey responses. Entrances to program rooms can be closed during programming 

113 
 
to prevent excess noise from surrounding exhibits. Utilizing signage to indicate that 
visitors are welcome to enter the space throughout the program can help to identify an 
open format. In addition, placing carpeting and rugs in program spaces may help 
dampen noise. Resources like noise-reducing headphones should also be available 
during programs that produce auditory stimulus. Finally, adding more structure to 
programming (e.g. Music Time) would be helpful in preventing excess noise.  
 
A lack of flexible seating options was observed in each of the daily programs. 
Most programs offered only two types of seating including stationary benches or floor 
space; child-sized backless stools and plastic chairs were offered in the Art Studio. 
Implementing flexible seating options within daily programs and throughout exhibits may 
help children with ASD regulate sensory input and combat sensory processing 
difficulties. Implementing sensory processing strategies, like alternative seating and 
tactile toys, can provide some children with the sensory input necessary to participate 
more positively in challenging environments (Bagatell et al. 2010). Possible flexible 
seating options include: therapy balls, peanut balls (i.e. peanut-shaped exercise balls), 
therapy cushions, t-stools, rocking chairs, accordion-style seating, textured rugs, etc. 
(Umeda and Dietz 2011; Matin Sadr et al. 2017; Bagatell et al. 2010). The Museum 
uses accordion-style seating within some exhibit areas, however these were absent 
during daily programs. Incorporating tools and resources like flexible seating and tactile 
objects that allow participants to move during a program may help them to focus and 
stimulate learning. Participants were observed occasionally using textured pillows 
during Storytime. Incorporating hand-held tactile objects within a program may increase 
a child’s focus by helping them direct sensory input. Other examples of tactile objects 

114 
 
include: massage balls, bean bags, tangles, stress balls, buckle toys, sensory rings, etc. 
Another tool that is easy to implement in a program (e.g. Storytime) are weighted lap 
pads. Weighted lap pads can provide sensory stimulation for children with ASD who 
seek sensory input or provide a calming sensation when a child feels overwhelmed.  
Some important considerations to make when selecting objects are: how easily 
can they be cleaned, are they distracting to other participants (e.g. how much noise do 
they produce), how will you distribute and collect objects from audience, and how will 
your museum allocate, find, and justify funding for these resources? It is important to 
note that the recommendations above can be utilized by all visitors, not just those 
diagnosed with ASD. If implemented in programs and exhibits, these resources may 
create more effective and inclusive learning environments and greater learning 
outcomes for visitors.  
Recommendations for Daily Programming 
The barriers to inclusion identified within this study can be prevented through 
proper investment in staff training and resources, designing programming through the 
lens of the Universal Design for Learning Guidelines, and collaborating with community 
partners during the planning and implementation of programs. The following are 
recommendations for improvements to the Museum’s daily programming that will make 
the programs more inclusive to a neurodiverse audience. 
Invest in Staff Training and Resources 
The Museum needs to dedicate the time and funding to properly train their staff 
(and volunteers) how to serve diverse audiences and how to create and facilitate 
inclusive programs. Training related to disability awareness is important for the 

115 
 
Museum’s entire staff, encompassing executive leadership through part-time facilitation 
staff. Currently, accessibility and inclusion are a focus for staff training on a quarterly 
basis. However, disability awareness training should be an integral part of onboarding 
for all staff at the Museum, so they can provide quality experiences to all visitors from 
the beginning.  
Museum facilitation staff are responsible for facilitating in exhibits and leading 
daily programming shortly after their hire date. Providing staff with regular opportunities 
to understand daily program content and practice facilitation among an audience of their 
peers is a way to help them build confidence and comfort in delivering programs to 
visitors. Without proper training or previous experience working with a neurodiverse 
audience, staff are not (without prior training) equipped with the skills necessary to 
present programmatic content in an inclusive way. In addition, as noted during peer 
interviews, some experiences are not easily replicable during training. Reflecting on real 
life situations and sharing experiences among team members can be beneficial during 
training. Training should be provided that relates to staff’s specific roles at the institution 
(i.e. providing examples that reflect experiences they are likely to have in their role at 
the Museum). Disability awareness and Universal Design for Learning Guidelines 
should be introduced during the onboarding or initial training period for new facilitation 
or programs staff and should be an ongoing element of future trainings. For example, 
facilitation staff should understand the potential barriers that could arise during Music 
Time for children with ASD, and how they may be able to overcome these barriers 
through the use of resources like noise-cancelling headphones or the selective use of 
instruments that produce excessive noise. The Museum may find it helpful to reach out 

116 
 
to partner organizations like occupational therapists and therapeutic service providers to 
provide training and facilitation tips for staff working with a neurodiverse audience. In 
addition, supervisors need to commit time to observing facilitation staff during daily 
programming. Communicating areas for improvement and implementing appropriate 
additional training should help the museum improve the quality of program facilitation. 
From this study, it is evident that many resources are seen as beneficial for 
individuals with ASD. Most of the institutions interviewed make these resources 
available at their front desk, during sensory events, and for pre-registered programs. 
However, accessibility resources should be included as an integral part of regular daily 
programming for the whole audience regardless of ability. In addition, the systematic 
integration of accessibility resources during regular programming may help to reduce 
the stigma that individuals can face when utilizing these resources. The Museum should 
make a kit of accessibility resources available during daily programming. This kit should 
include but not be limited to: noise-reducing headphones, fidget or tactile objects, and 
pressure devices (e.g. weighted lap pads). It may also be helpful to include a laminated 
reference sheet within these kits to help staff understand what tools may be helpful in 
particular situations. Making these resources more readily available can help reduce the 
time it takes to remediate a stressful situation. In addition, the Museum should highlight 
available accessibility resources with signage at their front desk and in locations 
throughout the museum that may be challenging for a sensory-sensitive audience. The 
Museum should also incorporate the flexible seating options available during Sensory 
Story & Play Time. Finally, visual schedules should be implemented as a facilitation 
device during daily programming. They provide structure to a program and can help 

117 
 
increase confidence, decrease anxiety, and boost self-esteem by allowing participants 
to anticipate what is coming next. Visual schedules are also an effective tool when 
communicating to visual learners or with individuals who have difficulty communicating 
verbally (Grassi 2018). In addition, visual schedules can assist staff by providing a tool 
to guide them through facilitation. Proper staff training and the implementation and 
normalization of resources are vital contributions to providing a more inclusive 
experience for children with ASD.  
Design Programs with Universal Design for Learning Guidelines 
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) (see Figure 2.1) can be applied to various 
content areas and contexts including daily programming at the Museum. These 
guidelines are meant to reduce barriers and maximize learning opportunities for a 
neurodiverse audience. According to Rappolt-Schlichtmann and Daley,  
Under UDL, disability is understood as an artifact of limitations of the designed 
environment. Disability is not situated within the person, but rather in the 
interaction between the person and the environment. Difficulty is experienced as 
a result of design that did not anticipate the full range of variability in the 
population. (2013: 307-308) 
 
This perspective reflects the social model of disability; the view that disability is not an 
individualized problem but a form of discrimination and oppression (Matthews 2009).  
The guidelines are organized both vertically and horizontally. Vertically, the 
guidelines are organized into three principles: engagement, representation, and action 
and expression. These principles move from the outside in. The top row represents 
strategies from the outside or facilitation, while the bottom row represents strategies 
implemented by the individual. In addition, each principle is broken down into guidelines 

118 
 
with corresponding checkpoints (CAST 2018).  Horizontally, the guidelines are 
organized in three rows: access, build, and internalize:  
• Access - guidelines that suggest ways to increase access to the learning 
goal by recruiting interest and by offering options for perception and physical 
action 
• Build – guidelines that suggest ways to develop effort and persistence, 
language and symbols, and expression and communication.  
• Internalize – guidelines that suggest ways to empower learners through self-
regulation, comprehension, and executive function (CAST 2018) 
 
 The ultimate goal of UDL is to “develop ‘expert learners’ who are, each in their own 
way, resourceful and knowledgeable, strategic and goal-directed, purposeful and 
motivated (CAST 2018).” While the bottom row of the guideline table represents the 
goal of UDL, the strategies in the top two rows are essential to an individual’s ability to 
reach the ‘expert learner’ stage.  
To begin utilizing the guidelines during program design, it is vital to understand what 
you want the audience to know or learn. As a constructivist institution, each of the daily 
programs has a different purpose or goal, however those goals remain broad and open 
to interpretation by the learner:  
• The goal of Storytime is to give children and their families the opportunity to 
explore literature in a variety of ways and introduce this audience to a variety 
of children’s books. 
• The goal of Music Time is to introduce children and their families to a wide 
range of music concepts and give them the opportunity to explore movement 
in a variety of ways. 
• The goal of the Art Studio is to provide children and their families a creative 
outlet where they can explore a variety of media in an open-ended 
environment. 
 
To overcome barriers in the learning environment, programs are designed with the 
following:  
 

119 
 
• Multiple means of engagement – offer options that engage the audience and 
keep their interest 
• Multiple means of representation – show the information to the audience in 
different ways 
• Multiple means of action and expression – allow the audience to approach 
learning tasks and demonstrate what they know in different ways (CAST 2018) 
 
Program content should be flexible and provide genuine learning opportunities for each 
individual. The following are recommendations for the design and facilitation of 
Storytime, Music Time, and the Art Studio that reflect checkpoints within UDL:  
Engagement 
• Close the doors to a program to lessen distractions from outside environment, 
present multiple seating options, and utilize a visual schedule during the 
program. (7.3) 
• Allow participants to choose their spot in the program room and any resources 
they would like to use. (7.1) 
• Use media or activities that are representative of diversity (race, culture, 
ethnicity, gender, ability, etc.). (7.2) 
• Facilitators need to provide opportunities for the audience to actively participate 
in the program. (7.2) 
• Present activities that challenge participants to work alongside their caregivers; 
that support the adult/child learning partnership. (8.2) 
• Encourage participants to work cooperatively to complete an activity. (8.3) 
• Refrain from using feedback that compares participants to one another or implies 
a judgement on the quality of work. (8.4) 
• Provide ongoing feedback throughout the program that engages participants to 
reflect on their work. (9.1) 
• Prompt participants to reflect on how to overcome frustrating situations. (9.2) 
 
Representation 
• Utilize materials that contain larger text and graphics when possible. (1.1) 
• Use a combination of graphics and text in media and visual schedules. (1.2) 
• Use both visual and auditory examples when explaining a concept. (1.2) 
• Provide physical examples of concepts when possible (1.3) 
• Connect new vocabulary to learners’ experience and prior knowledge (2.1) 
• Provide alternatives to the dominant language (e.g. English) when possible (2.4) 
• Utilize visuals as non-linguistic supports for facilitation (2.4) 
• Highlight connections between program content and the supporting activity. (2.5) 
• Make connections to other parts of S.T.E.A.M. when possible. (3.1) 
• Utilize multiple examples to explain a singular concept. (3.2) 
• Give explicit prompts and instruction for activities and throughout the program. 
(3.3) 

120 
 
• Remove unnecessary distractions from the learning environment. (3.3) 
• Review program content throughout session (3.4) 
 
Action and Expression 
• Incorporate physical movement whenever possible (4.1) 
• Provide alternative forms of physical movement (4.2) 
• Utilize media and physical manipulatives to support program content (5.1) 
• Have multiple staff who use different approaches during facilitation lead 
programs (5.3) 
• Use visual schedule or timers to set goals during program (6.1) 
• Ask participants to explain a concept and/or reflect on their work (6.2) 
 
Planning programs with these guidelines can help alleviate barriers to a learning 
environment for all children (including those with ASD). Two daily programming samples 
(see Appendix I and J) have been designed using the aforementioned UDL criteria. 
Each sample includes the materials needed, guidance on how to set up the 
environment, a lesson plan, the skills being focused on during the lesson, ways the 
facilitator can engage the visitors, and additional notes.  These lessons use materials 
already present at the Museum or ones that are available online for free. In addition to 
implementing UDL within daily programming, the Museum should collaborate with 
community partners to support inclusion efforts.  
Cultivate and Maintain Community Partnerships 
 
All of the museums interviewed during this study identified community partners 
that have supported their journey towards inclusion. Currently, the site Museum 
engages both the AIDE committee and Autism Round Table in devising new initiatives 
to make the Museum more inclusive to children with ASD and beyond. The Museum 
should continue to cultivate and maintain relationships with a variety of interested 
parties including: caregivers, teachers, therapists, organizations, etc. It is important to 
note that individuals with ASD should be a part of discussions regarding inclusion efforts 

121 
 
at the Museum. Currently, the Autism Round Table consists of adults who actively work 
with children with ASD. However, institutions should strive to include children or adults 
with ASD in these discussions. Collaborating with individuals who have professional 
and/or first-hand experience with ASD is a valuable, low-cost strategy when the two 
parties use the partnership for mutual growth. For example, families or organizations 
may wish to participate voluntarily in advisory groups if the outcome will benefit their 
audience. Community partners may be able to provide additional support or funding for 
events, programs, and research initiatives. In addition, therapists or local day schools 
may be willing to provide training for facilitation staff to increase their disability 
awareness and provide recommendations for activities or facilitation strategies that are 
effective for a neurodiverse audience (including those with ASD).  
Measuring the Effectiveness of Recommendations and Inclusion Strategies 
As mentioned previously, currently there are no specific metrics to understand 
what constitutes successful inclusion and a systemic response to this pressing issue will 
remain unrealized without the recommendation of measurable strategies to implement 
within the museum environment. Therefore, this study recommends the following 
practices to measure the effectiveness of daily programming and inclusion strategies at 
the site Museum. It is important to note that the recommendations from this study are 
experimental, however other museums may find these practices applicable at their own 
institutions.  
Facilitation Staff Survey 
 
The study site should create a Facilitation Staff Survey for Play Facilitators and 
Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitators to complete that gives them a platform to 

122 
 
express their feelings regarding daily programming. This survey should be devised and 
implemented by the Public Programs Coordinator, Museum Experience Manager, and 
Art and Maker Specialist, who have direct responsibility for daily programming and 
facilitation staff training. The Facilitation Staff Survey should be anonymous, as some 
staff may feel uncomfortable expressing their concerns or challenges regarding daily 
programming and facilitation. Examples of prompts to incorporate in the survey include:  
• What aspects of the Gallery Space or Art Studio present challenges during 
facilitation?  
• What specific topics would you like to explore or review during facilitation 
training?  
• What tools would make it easier to facilitate (Storytime, Music Time, Art Studio)?  
• What kinds of activities would you like to incorporate into (Storytime, Music Time, 
Art Studio)?  
• What technology or devices used during daily programming present a challenge?  
 
After the study site incorporates accessibility resources and strategies (e.g. UDL, visual 
schedules, kit of accessibility resources, flexible seating options, etc.) into daily 
programs, the survey should be updated to include prompts that ask staff to express 
their feelings regarding these initiatives. Implementing the Facilitation Staff Survey on 
an ongoing basis may be an effective way to track the progress of staff training and their 
comfort level facilitating the revised programs. Supervisors can use findings from this 
survey to modify trainings and daily programs.  
 
Supervisor Observation and Evaluation 
 
In addition to surveying facilitation staff, supervisors (Museum Experience 
Manager, Art and Maker Specialist, and Public Programs Coordinator) may implement 
ongoing observations to evaluate daily programs according to UDL Guidelines and the 
quality of facilitation. These observations could focus on the aforementioned UDL 

123 
 
guidelines that were recommended for implementation into program design at the 
Museum (i.e. which guidelines are present or absent during daily programming). In 
addition, focusing on the quality of facilitation may reveal which staff members may 
benefit from additional training and those who represent prime examples of facilitation. 
A summary of the findings from these observations may be incorporated into yearly staff 
performance reviews. However, it is important that these findings be communicated to 
facilitation staff throughout the year, so strengths can be celebrated and areas for 
improvement can be responded to in a timely fashion. 
Daily Program Visitor Survey 
 
The Museum may find it beneficial to incorporate a Daily Program Visitor Survey 
into the evaluation strategies for daily programs. Similar to the Accessibility and 
Inclusion Survey, results from surveys may provide insight into how visitors view daily 
programs at the Museum including visitor expectations regarding program content, 
facilitation, and environment. Example prompts for the Daily Program Visitor Survey 
could include:  
• Which of the following daily programs did you experience today? (Storytime, 
Music Time, Art Studio) 
• What aspects of the program did you or your child enjoy?  
• What aspects of the program did you or your child find challenging?  
• How did the facilitator interact with you or your child during the program?  
• How did the program content meet or fail to meet your expectations for this 
program?  
 
This survey could be introduced to visitors after each session by the facilitation staff. It 
is pertinent that the survey be brief but include open-ended questions that are easy to 
reflect on but provide helpful insight. The Public Programs Coordinator could be 

124 
 
responsible for organizing and evaluating the results from the survey and reporting 
these results to the Education and Programs Department as appropriate.  
Community Observation and Evaluation 
 
In addition to surveying visitors about daily programs, the Museum may find it 
beneficial to work with the Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist and Autism Round 
Table to perform observations and evaluations on daily programs. These parties could 
evaluate facilitation and programs to determine whether they are inclusive to individuals 
with ASD. The Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist could coordinate with members of 
the Autism Round Table (e.g. therapists, teachers, caregivers, and adults with ASD) to 
visit the Museum’s daily programs and provide feedback related to program content, 
facilitation strategies, accessibility resources, and the environment. The Accessibility 
and Inclusion Specialist could then communicate findings from these observations and 
evaluations to the Public Programs Coordinator. This ongoing practice could provide 
insight into whether current inclusion strategies are being implemented effectively and 
what aspects of the programs or facilitation need improvement.  
 

125 
 
Chapter 8: CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this study was to identify, through peer museum interviews, 
survey, and observation the current barriers at and in relation to the study site and ways 
to overcome them so they can support an inclusive experience for children with ASD. 
Research and methods focused on three main questions: 
● What are the current barriers to children with ASD when visiting a children’s 
museum?  
 
● How should a museum invest their time and resources (including human 
resources) to improve inclusion efforts?  
 
● How can programming within a children’s museum be designed and 
implemented to provide an inclusive experience for children with ASD?  
 
As institutions of informal learning, children’s museums, like the study site, 
provide creative, sensory-rich learning experiences to their visitors. Peer interviews 
identified common barriers to inclusive learning environments for children with ASD. In 
addition, these interviews championed the use of a variety of inclusion efforts including 
utilizing inclusive design strategies in exhibit and program development. Survey results 
showed that visitors utilize these environments for leisure and supplementary 
educational opportunities. However, due to various barriers related to the Museum 
environment and characteristics of ASD, children with the disorder are not always able 
to have a positive experience. Finally, observations revealed that while the Museum 
offers many accessibility resources to visitors, its current daily programming is 
unsupportive of a neurodiverse audience.  
Outcomes from this study resulted in the following recommendations to improve 
the experiences of children with ASD at the study site, and other children’s museums, in 
relation to daily programming and resources: 

126 
 
● Invest in Staff Training and Resources 
● Design Programs with Universal Design for Learning Guidelines 
● Cultivate and Maintain Community Partnerships 
 
Educating and empowering staff through training is essential to the success of a 
museum as an inclusive environment. A museum’s representatives, including its staff, 
volunteers, and board should understand and be representative of their diverse 
audience. Disability awareness training and Universal Design for Learning concepts 
should both be an ongoing focus within staff development. Multiple peer institutions 
identified other visitors as potential barriers to an inclusive experience for children with 
ASD. An educated and empowered staff can support understanding among visitors by 
representing positive behaviors and interactions with families experiencing ASD.    
Designing programs with Universal Design for Learning Guidelines, helps 
support a neurodiverse audience from the beginning. In a truly inclusive environment, a 
visitor should not have to request an accommodation to an exhibit or program; as it 
should be designed with their needs in mind. While some components such as lighting 
or flexible seating can be implemented more easily, some barriers may be more difficult 
to design around.  Accessibility resources may be helpful to individuals, regardless of 
whether they have a disability. Incorporating these tools within the design of a program 
or exhibit can help facilitate a full experience for each member of a museum’s audience. 
Resources should not only be stored at the front desk waiting to be checked out, they 
should be ready and accessible in the spaces a visitor may need them. Daily 
programming should follow checkpoints of the Universal Design for Learning Guidelines 
to support an effective learning environment for all visitors. For example, this may 
include utilizing a visible schedule that helps direct staff and visitors through a program, 

127 
 
engaging participants in reflection, and incorporating socially and physically engaging 
activities into a program. It is important to note that the use of UDL strategies in a 
children’s museum environment is experimental at this stage. Evaluation whether these 
strategies are effective for informal learning environments, like children’s museums, is 
an important area for future research.  
 
Finally, museums should engage community partners that are invested in 
providing inclusive experiences for children with ASD by cultivating and maintaining 
mutually beneficial relationships with individuals, caregivers, teachers, therapists, and 
organizations. For example, there may be community partners who can assist in the 
training and education of staff in regard to serving individuals with disabilities. In 
addition, it is vital for museums to engage members of their community that are 
diagnosed with ASD. Children and adults with ASD can potentially provide unique 
insight into their experience in a children’s museum. Inclusion merits that their voices be 
heard in these discussions. Finally, it is important for institutions to share accessibility 
and inclusion ideas and practices with other museums. As leaders in informal education 
that have the capacity to become foundations in the field for inclusion, children’s 
museums have a responsibility to share this knowledge with others.  
 
In order to measure whether the aforementioned recommendations are effective, 
it is recommended that the Museum implement the following practices: surveying 
facilitation staff about daily programming, having supervisors observe and evaluate daily 
programs, conducting daily program surveys with visitors, and having community 
partners observe and evaluate daily programs specifically in regard to children with 
ASD.  

128 
 
REFERENCES 
American Alliance of Museums (AAM). 2008. “Excellence and Equity: Education and  
the Public Dimension of Museums.” Accessed: 2/15/18. http://www.aam-
us.org/docs/default-source/resource-library/excellence-and-equity.pdf?sfvrsn=0 
 
 
American Alliance of Museums (AAM). 2014. Diversity and Inclusion Policy. Accessed:   
7/20/17. http://aam-us.org/about-us/strategic-plan/diversity-and-  
Inclusion-policy  
 
American Alliance of Museums (AAM). 2015. “Visitor Voices: A Story of Accessibility  
and Inclusion.” Museum, September/October: 36-42.  
 
American Alliance of Museums (AAM). 2016.  2016-2020 Strategic Plan. Accessed:  
10/15/2018. https://www.aam-us.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/english-strat-
plan.pdf 
 
American Alliance of Museums (AAM). 2018. “Facing Change: Insights from AAM’s  
DEAI Working Group.” Accessed: 10/15/2018. https://www.aam-us.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/AAM-DEAI-Working-Group-Full-Report-2018.pdf 
 
American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental  
disorders: DSM-5 (5th ed.). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association. 
 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). 2018. Augmentative and  
Alternative Communication. Accessed: 11/11/2018. 
https://www.asha.org/PRPSpecificTopic.aspx?folderid=8589942773&section=Ke
y_Issues 
 
Andre, L., Durksen, T., and Volman, M.L. 2017. “Museums as avenues of learning for  
children: a decade of research.” Learning Environ Res, 20: 47-76.  
 
Art Beyond Sight. 2014. Disability and Inclusion: Resources for Museum Studies  
Programs. Accessed: 10/15/2018. http://www.artbeyondsight.org/dic/ 
 
Association of Children’s Museums (ACM). 2018. About ACM. Accessed: 10/15/2018.  
http://www.childrensmuseums.org/demo/index.php/component/content/article/40/
68-diversity-initiative.html 
 
Association of Children’s Museums (ACM). 2018. ACM Diversity Statement.  
Accessed: 10/15/2018. 
http://www.childrensmuseums.org/images/ACMDiversityStatement2017.pdf 
 
Association of Science – Technology Centers (ASTC). 2018. Museums’ Legal  
Obligations. Accessed: 10/14/18. 
http://www.astc.org/resource/access/obligations.htm 

129 
 
 
Autism Speaks. 2017. Symptoms: What are the Symptoms of Autism? Accessed:   
9/28/17. https://www.autismspeaks.org/what-autism/symptoms  
  
Bagatell, N., Mirigliani, G., Patterson, C., Reyes, Y. and Test, L. 2010. “Effectiveness of  
Therapy Ball Chairs on Classroom Participation in Children with Autism spectrum 
disorder.” American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 64: 895-903.  
 
Bamberger, Yael and Tali Tal. 2007. “Learning in a Personal Context: Levels of Choice  
in a Free Choice Learning Environment in Science and Natural History 
Museums.” Science Education, 91: 75-95.  
 
Benjamin, N., Haden, C.A., and Wilkerson, E. 2010. “Enhancing Building, Conversation,  
and Learning Through Caregiver-Child Interactions in a Children’s Museum.” 
Developmental Psychology, 46(2): 502-515.  
 
Beyer, Jannik and Lone Gammeltoft. 2000. Autism and Play. Jessica Kingsley  
Publishers. 
 
Bovee, Jean-Paul. 2000. “A Right to Our Own Life, Our Own Way.” Focus on Autism  
and Other Developmental Disabilities, Winter 2000, 15(4): 250-252.  
 
Buysse, Virginia. 2011. “Access, participation, and supports: The defining features of  
high-quality inclusion.” Zero to Three Journal, 31(4), 24-29. 
 
Carle, Eric. 1969. The Very Hungry Caterpillar. World Publishing Company. 
 
CAST. 2018. About the Graphic Organizer. Accessed: 10/28/2018.  
http://udlguidelines.cast.org/more/about-graphic-organizer 
 
CAST. 2018. About Universal Design for Learning. Accessed 10/14/18.  
http://www.cast.org/our-work/about-
udl.html?utm_source=udlguidelines&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=none&u
tm_content=homepage#.W8qzJmhKjD5 
 
CAST. 2018. UDL & the Learning Brain. Accessed: 10/19/18.  
http://www.cast.org/binaries/content/assets/common/publications/articles/cast-
udlandthebrain-20180321.pdf 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2018. Autism Spectrum Disorder   
(ASD). Accessed: 7/24/17. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/  
index.html  
 
Chicago Children’s Museum (CCM). 2018. Accessibility & Inclusion. Accessed:  
2/15/18. http://www.chicagochildrensmuseum.org/index.php /about/accessibility-
inclusion 

130 
 
 
ChildServe. 2018. Get to Know ChildServe. Accessed: 10/01/2018.  
https://www.childserve.org/about/ 
 
Chistol, L.T., Bandini, L.G., Must, A. Phillips, S., Cermak, S.A., and Curtain, A.2018.  
“Sensory Sensitivity and Food Selectivity in Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder.” Journal of Autism Developmental Disorders, 48: 583-591. 
  
DEC/NAEYC. 2009. Early childhood inclusion: A joint position statement of the Division  
for Early Childhood (DEC) and the National Association for the Education of 
Young Children (NAEYC). Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina, FPG 
Child Development Institute.  
 
Deng, Liya. 2015. “Inclusive Museum and Its Impact on Learning of Special Needs  
Children.” Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 
November 2015, 52(1), 6-10.  
 
Easter Seals. 2015. 2015 State Autism Profiles Illinois. Accessed: 10/10/18.  
http://www.easterseals.com/explore-resources/living-with-
autism/2015_autism_illinois.pdf 
 
Erickson, W., Lee, C., von Schrader, S. 2017. Disability Statistics from the American  
Community Survey (ACS). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Yang-Tan Institute 
(YTI). Accessed: 10/10/18. www.disabilitystatistics.org 
 
Explora. 2018. Exhibits. Accessed: 10/12/18.  
http://www.explora.us/en/visit/exhibits-page/ 
 
Explora. 2018. Annual Report July 2016-June 2017. Accessed: 10/12/18.  
http://www.explora.us/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/annual-report-final-2016-
17__final-web.pdf 
 
Falk, John Howard and Lynn Diane Dierking. (1992). The Museum Experience.  
Washington, D.C.: Whalesback Books.   
 
Family and Community Together (FACT). 2018. Who We Are. Accessed: 10/20/18.  
https://factoregon.org/who-we-are/ 
 
Forman, George E. and Fleet Hill. 1984. Constructive Play: Applying Piaget in the  
Preschool.  Addison-Wesley Publishing.   
 
Foutz, Susan and Claire Thoma Emmons. 2017. “Application and Adaptation of an  
Institutional Learning Framework. Journal of Museum Education, 42(2): 179-189. 
 
Freed-Brown, Elise. 2010. A Different Mind: Developing Museum Programs for  
Children with Autism. Theses. Paper 15.  

131 
 
  
Ganz, Jennifer B. and Flores, Margaret, M. 2010. “Supporting the Play of Preschoolers  
with Autism Spectrum Disorders: Implementation of Visual Scripts.” Young 
Exceptional Children, March 2010, 13(2): 58-70. 
 
Gill, Jim. 2016. Vote for Jim Gill. Jim Gill Music. CD. 
 
Golden, Tamara and Lynn Walsh. 2013. “Play for All at Chicago Children’s Museum: A  
History and Overview.” Curator, July 2013, 56(3): 337-347.   
  
Grassi, Renee. 2018. Visual Schedules: Making Programs Accessible for All. ALSC  
Blog. Accessed: 10/02/2018. https://www.alsc.ala.org/blog/2018/06/visual-
schedules-making-programs-accessible-for-all/ 
 
Greenspan, Stanley I. and Serena Wieder. 2006. Engaging Autism: Using the Floortime  
Approach to Help Children Relate, Communicate, and Think. Da Capo Press.   
  
Harris, James C. 2016. “The origin and natural history of autism spectrum disorder.”  
Nature Neuroscience, November 2016, 19(11): 1390-91 
 
Hein, George E. 2001. The Challenge and Significance of Constructivism. Hands-On!  
Europe. Keynote. 15 Nov. 2001.  
 
Hein, George E. 2005. “The Role of Museums in Society: Education and Social Action.”  
Curator, 48(4): 357-363.  
 
Henderson, Tara Z. and David J. Atencio. 2007. “Integration of Play, Learning, and  
Experience:  What Museums Afford Young Visitors.” Journal of Early Childhood 
Education, 35: 245-251.  
 
  
Hofferth, Sandra L. and John F. Sandberg. 2001. “How American Children Spend Their  
Time.” Journal of Marriage and Family, May 2001, 63: 295-308.   
 
Hyman, Susan L. 2013. New DSM-5 includes changes to autism criteria. The American  
Academy of Pediatrics. Accessed: 10/15/2018. 
http://www.aappublications.org/content/early/2013/06/04/aapnews.20130604-1 
 
Ideishi, R.I., Cohn, E.S., Orsmond, G. I., Wintrol, J., Whalen, M., Nickolaus, S.,  
Swanson, J., and Siegel, B. 2013. Sensory Friendly Programming for People with 
Social & Cognitive Disabilities: A Guide for Performing Arts Settings. The 
Kennedy Center. Accessed: 5/5/2018. http://education.kennedy-
center.org/education/accessibility/lead/SensoryGuidebook.pdf 
  
Iowa Children’s Museum. 2018. A Little About Us. Accessed: 10/01/2018.  
https://theicm.org/about-us/museum-information/ 
 

132 
 
Jeffery-Clay, Kodi R. 1998. “Constructivism in Museums: How Museums Create  
Meaningful Learning Environments.” Journal of Museum Education, 23(1): 3-7.  
 
Kanics Inclusive Design Services, LLC. 2018. About. Accessed: 10/02/2018.  
http://committoinclusion.org/kanics-inclusive-design-services-llc/ 
 
Kanner, Leo. 1943. “Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact.” The Nervous Child, 2:  
217-50.  
 
Kohl Children’s Museum. 2018. About. Accessed: 10/14/2018.  
http://www.kohlchildrensmuseum.org/about/ 
 
Kohl Children’s Museum. 2017. Annual Report 2016-2017. Accessed: 10/14/2018.  
http://www.kohlchildrensmuseum.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/KCM_AnnualReport2017-sm.pdf 
 
Kraus, Lewis. 2017. 2016 Disability Statistics Annual Report. Durham, NH: University of  
New Hampshire.  
 
Kulik, Taylor K. and Tina S. Fletcher. 2016. “Considering the Museum Experience of  
Children with Autism.” Curator, January 2016, 59(1): 27-38.  
  
Langa, L.A., Monaco, P., Subramaniam, M., Jaeger, P.T., Shanahan, K., and Ziebarth,  
B. 2013. “Improving the Museum Experiences of Children with Autism   
Spectrum Disorders and Their Families: An Exploratory Examination of Their 
Motivations and Needs and Using Web-based Resources to Meet Them.” 
Curator, July 2013, 56(3): 323-335.   
 
Lieberman, Lauren J. 2017. “The Need for Universal Design for Learning.” Journal of  
Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance, 88(3): 5-7.  
 
Long, Emily A. 2010. Classroom Lighting Design for Students with Autism Spectrum  
Disorders. Theses. Kansas State University.  
  
Madison Children’s Museum (MCM). 2018. About Madison Children’s Museum.  
Accessed: 10/02/2018. http://madisonchildrensmuseum.org/about/ 
 
Madison Children’s Museum (MCM). 2018. Sensory Friendly Museum Time.  
Accessed: 2/15/18. madisonchildrensmuseum.org/programs-and-events/special-
events/sensory/ 
 
Majewski, Janice. 1996. Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible Exhibition Design.   
Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Accessibility Program. 
Accessed: 5/5/2018. https://www.si.edu/Accessibility/SGAED 
 
Matin Sadr N., Haghgoo, H., Samadi, S.A., Rassafiani, M., Bakhshi, E., Hassanabadi,  

133 
 
H. “The Impact of Dynamic Seating on Classroom Behavior of Students with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder.” Iran J Child Neurol. Winter 2017, 11(1): 29-36. 
 
Matthews, Nicole. 2009. “Teaching the ‘invisible’ disabled students in the classroom:  
disclosure, inclusion and the social model of disability.” Teaching in Higher 
Education, 14(3): 229-239.  
 
Maxwell, Lorraine E. and Gary W. Evans. 2002. “Museums as Learning Settings: The  
Importance of the Physical Environment.” Journal of Museum Education, 27(1): 
3-7.  
 
McAllister, Keith. 2010. The ASD Friendly Classroom-Design Complexity, Challenge  
and Characteristics. Paper presented at Design Research Society International 
Conference 2010, Montreal, Canada. 
  
Meyer, S., Veneziano-Korzec, A., Larrivee, L., and Stacy, K. 2016. “Improving Museum  
Docents’ Communication Skills.” Curator, January 2016, 59(1): 55-60. 
 
National Endowment for the Arts. 2003. Design for Accessibility: A Cultural   
Administrator’s Handbook. 1-167.   
 
NISE. 2008. Universal Design Guidelines for Public Programs in Science Museums.  
Accessed: 10/14/18. 
http://www.nisenet.org/sites/default/files/UniversalDesignGuidelinesPrograms_G
uide_May10.pdf 
 
Pathways.org. 2018. Our Mission. Accessed: 10/26/18. https://pathways.org/us/our- 
mission/ 
 
Peoria PlayHouse Children’s Museum. 2018. 2017 Impact Report. Accessed:  
10/10/2018. https://peoriaplayhouse.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/2017-
Impact-Report-Individual-Pages-8.5x11-FOR-WEBSITE.pdf 
 
Portland Children’s Museum. 2018. About Us. Accessed: 10/02/2018.  
https://www.portlandcm.org/about-us 
 
Portland Children’s Museum. 2018. Accessibility. Accessed: 10/02/2018.  
https://www.portlandcm.org/visit/accessibility 
 
Potter, Carol and Chris Whittaker. 2001. Enabling Communication in Children with  
Autism. Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
  
Pratt, Cathy. 1997. “There is no place called inclusion.” The Reporter, 2(3): 4-5, 13-14. 
 
Pyramid Educational Consultants. 2018. Picture Exchange Communication System  
(PECS)®. Accessed: 11/11/2018. https://pecsusa.com/pecs/ 

134 
 
 
Ralabate, Patricia K. 2011. “Universal Design for Learning: Meeting the Needs of All  
Students.” The ASHA Leader, August 2011, 16: 14-17.  
 
Rapp, Whitney H. 2005. “Inquiry-Based Environments for the Inclusion of Students with   
Exceptional Learning Needs.” Remedial and Special Education, 
September/October 2005, 26(5):297-310.  
 
Rappolt-Schlichtmann, Gabrielle and Samantha G. Daley. 2013. “Providing Access to  
Engagement in Learning: The Potential of Universal Design for Learning in 
Museum Design.” Curator, July 2013, 56(3): 307-321. 
 
Relevant Play. 2018. Mad Mattr. Accessed: 3/23/18.  
http://www.relevantplay.com/Home/MadMattr/ 
 
Rodger, Sylvia and Jenny Ziviani. 1999. “Play-based Occupational Therapy.”  
International Journal of Disability, Development, and Education, 46(3): 337-365.   
  
Rudy, Lisa J. 2004. “Welcoming Kids Who Learn Differently.” Exhibitionist, 23(1): 30-34.  
  
Saint Paul – Ramsey County Public Health. 2018. The Wakanheza Project™: creating  
welcoming environments. Accessed: 11/17/2018. 
https://www.ramseycounty.us/sites/default/files/Health%20and%20Medical/Public
%20Health%20Initiatives/The_wakanheza_project_creating_welcoming_environ
ments_12.8.2015.pdf 
 
Sciencenter. 2018. About the Sciencenter. Accessed: 10/20/18.  
http://www.sciencenter.org/about-us.html 
 
Sciencenter. 2018. Plan Your Visit. Accessed: 10/20/18.  
http://www.sciencenter.org/plan-your-visit.html 
 
Shore, Steven. 2001. “Steven Shore: Understanding the Autism Spectrum-What  
Teachers Need to Know.” Intervention in School and Clinic, May 2001, 36(5): 
293-299, 305.  
 
Study Site. FY 16-17 Annual Report. 2017.  
 
Study Site. Learning Framework. 2018.  
  
Study Site. Who We Are. 2018.  
 
The Center for Universal Design. 1997. The Principles of Universal Design, Version 2.0.  
Raleigh, NC: North Carolina State University. 
 
Thompson, Christine M. 2015. “Constructivism in the Art Classroom: Praxis and Policy.”  

135 
 
Arts Education Policy Review, 116: 118-127.  
 
Tyler, William S. 2015. Accommodating Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder in  
Museums. History Thesis. Paper 33.  
  
Umeda, Caroline and Jean Deitz. 2011. “Effects of Therapy Cushions on Classroom  
Behaviors of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.” American Journal of 
Occupational Therapy, 65: 152-159.  
 
United States Access Board. 2018. Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) of 1968. Accessed  
on 10/14/18. https://www.access-board.gov/the-board/laws/architectural-barriers-
act-aba 
 
United States Census Bureau. 2018. Accessed:  
3/22/18. https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/dashboard /  
 
United States Census Bureau. 2012-2016 American Community Survey Demographic  
and Housing Estimates.  Accessed: 3/22/18. 
https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src
=CF 
 
U.S. Department of Justice. 2009. A Guide to Disability Rights Laws. Accessed:  
10/15/2018. https://www.ada.gov/cguide.htm#anchor66055 
 
U.S. Department of Justice. 2009. Maintaining Accessibility in Museums. Accessed:  
10/15/2018. https://www.ada.gov/business/museum_access.htm 
 
U.S. Department of Justice. 2010. Americans with Disabilities Act Title III Regulations:  
Part 36 Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability in Public Accommodations 
and Commercial Facilities. Accessed: 2/20/18. 
https://www.ada.gov/regs2010/titleIII_2010/titleIII_2010_regulations.htm 
 
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 1973. Rehabilitation Act of 1973.  
Accessed: 2/20/18. https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/history/35th/thelaw/rehab_act-
1973.html 
 
 
Vignocchi, C., Chiarinotti, P., and Borando, S. 2018. Shake the Tree! Candlewick.  
 
Volkmar, Fred R. and Brian Reichow. 2013. “Autism in DSM-5: progress and  
challenges.” Molecular Autism, 4(13):1-6.  
 
Vygotsky, L.S. 1978. Mind in society: The development of higher psychological   
processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
Wing, Lorna. 2005. “Reflections on Opening Pandora’s Box.” Journal of Autism and  
Developmental Disorders, 35(2):197-203.  

136 
 
 
Wolff, Sula. 2004. “The History of Autism.” European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,  
13: 201-208.  
 
Woodcock, A., Georgiou, D., Jackson, J., and Woolner, A. (n.d.). Designing a Tailorable  
Environment for Children with Autistic Spectrum Disorders. The Design Institute. 
Coventry School of Art and Design, Coventry University, U.K.  
 
Wow! Children’s Museum. 2018. About Us. Accessed: 10/20/2018.  
http://wowchildrensmuseum.org/about-us/ 
 
Wow! Children’s Museum. 2018. Forest of Light. Accessed: 10/20/2018.  
http://wowchildrensmuseum.org/forest-of-light/ 
 
Wow! Children’s Museum. 2018. Wow! Exhibits. Accessed: 10/20/18.  
http://wowchildrensmuseum.org/exhibits/ 
 
 
 
 

137 
 
APPENDIX A – Overview of Education and Programs Staff 
Director of Education and Programs (FT) 
The Director of Education and Programs is a member of the Museum’s Executive 
Leadership team. As a member of this team, they participate in strategic planning and 
annual goal setting for the organization. They oversee the creation of educational 
content for new exhibits, public programs, school programs, and professional 
development programs. The Director of Education and Programs is responsible for the 
development and management of the Education and Programs Department’s budgets. 
They are tasked with coordinating, implementing, monitoring, and reporting on grants 
for the Education and Programs Department. The Director of Education and Programs 
is responsible for overseeing the development, presentation, and marketing of an 18-
month, mission-focused schedule of free and fee-based programming. In addition, they 
represent the Museum’s mission and maintain awareness of current early education 
trends through participation in presentations, serving on professional panels, and 
maintaining relationships with community partners. The Director of Education and 
Programs reports to the President & CEO.  
Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist (FT) 
The Museum has a dedicated staff person that focuses on the institution’s 
accessibility, inclusion, diversity, and equity efforts. Individuals with ASD are just one 
audience that this position focuses on. Other underserved groups that the Accessibility 
and Inclusion Specialist focuses on are low-income families, families experiencing other 
disabilities, LGBTQ+ families, and families of other races and cultures. The current 
Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist has an MS in Counseling Psychology and an MPA 
in Emergency & Disaster Management. Originally, the Accessibility and Inclusion 

138 
 
Specialist position was known as the Community Access Coordinator and was part-
time. Their duties focused on selling reduced-priced memberships, coordinating a 
monthly, public accessibility program, and participating in community outreach and early 
childhood events.  Changes in the Museum’s strategic plan led to further investment in 
this position, resulting in the development of a full-time position in July 2017. This is one 
of four specialist positions within the Museum’s Education & Programs Department. 
Currently, the main responsibilities of this position include the ones previously 
mentioned, in addition to increasing outreach to special needs populations and creating 
an environment in the Museum that is accessible and inclusive for all. These new 
responsibilities include working with the Museum’s Human Resources department on 
training initiatives, consulting with the Exhibits team on Universal Design strategies, and 
training front-line and administration staff on accessibility, inclusion, diversity, and 
equity. According to the Museum’s Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist, their goals for 
this position are to:  
1. Support community outreach for families that would not otherwise be able to 
attend the Museum. 
2. Bring the Museum, via portable exhibits and presentations, to all parts of the 
community to foster partnerships and relationships with agencies, schools, 
and organizations that serve at-risk families. 
3. Market the Museum’s reduced-price membership program to families and 
support their continuing visitation and membership renewal. 
4. Assist with creating an atmosphere for visitors, members, and employees to 
promote accessibility, inclusion, diversity, and equity.  
 
During the current fiscal year (2017-2018), their top priorities are to increase the 
frequency of attendance of families who receive reduced-priced memberships, continue 
to expand resources and supports in occupational therapy through the use of the 
Museum as a learning site, establish the necessary support to continue offering monthly 

139 
 
accessibility events, redesign and make improvements to the quiet room, and to start 
brainstorming ideas about a dedicated sensory room at the Museum. The Accessibility 
and Inclusion Specialist is not the only member of the Museum’s team that is 
responsible for creating and maintaining accessibility resources and/or programs. 
According to the Museum’s Accessibility and Inclusion Specialist, the Exhibits team and 
Public Programs Coordinator also share responsibility for supporting access efforts at 
the Museum.  
Art and Maker Specialist (FT) 
The Art and Maker Specialist is responsible for creating and maintaining all arts-
based programmatic initiatives of the Museum. They lead the development of Art and 
Maker content and associated facilitation training and/or professional development 
content for staff and volunteers. They are responsible for designing programming and 
overseeing planning and logistics for all Art and Maker-based programs that are based 
in the Museum’s Learning Framework and highlight the intersection of art, math, and 
science. In addition, the Art and Maker Specialist builds and maintains relationships with 
community partners to expand the impact of Arts and Maker programming. The position 
is a member of the Academic Specialist Team at the Museum and reports directly to the 
Director of Education and Programs.  
Public Programs Coordinator (FT) 
The Public Programs Coordinator is responsible for the administration, 
development, coordination, implementation, and evaluation of all visitor program 
offerings created by the Museum’s Education and Programs Department. They 
collaborate with the Museum Experience Manager, Museum management, and 

140 
 
Specialist staff on programmatic efforts. The Public Programs Coordinator assists the 
Museum Experience Manager in the supervision of Play Facilitation staff performance 
and the development and presentation of training materials. They are tasked with 
proactively developing, implementing, evaluating, and modifying policies and 
procedures for museum programming to support the Museum mission and strategic 
goals. The Public Programs Coordinator collaborates with the Manager of Volunteer 
Resources to train, schedule, and supervise volunteer facilitators and assistants. This 
position reports directly to the Director of Education and Programs.  
Museum Experience Manager (FT) 
The Museum Experience Manager hires, supervises, and schedules facilitation 
staff appropriately for the Museum. They oversee facilitation staff performance and 
mentor staff through frequent on-floor interactions. They identify training needs 
(including professional development opportunities) and collaborate with the Education 
and Exhibits staff in the development and presentation of training materials. They 
ensure that appropriate program, educational, exhibit, customer service, and safety 
knowledge have been acquired by staff before they are assigned independent 
responsibilities in the Museum. They proactively develop, implement, evaluate, and 
modify policies and procedures for museum facilitation operations to support the 
Museum mission and strategic goals. The Museum Experience Manager collaborates 
with the Manager of Volunteer Resources to supervise and train volunteer facilitators 
and assistants, and schedule volunteer shifts. They oversee exhibit cleaning, 
maintenance, and experience in collaboration with Exhibit personnel. This position 
reports directly to the Director of Education and Programs.  

141 
 
Lead Play Facilitator (FT) 
 
The Lead Play Facilitator position is responsible for assisting the Museum 
Experience Manager with overseeing the Museum floor and daily/special event 
programming. They are tasked with facilitating the child/adult visitor interaction with 
exhibits and on/offsite programs by encouraging and modeling the importance of open-
ended and multiple outcome experiences. They maintain a safe, educational, 
hospitable, and aesthetically pleasing museum/outreach environment. This position 
assists in the training, mentoring, observation, and evaluation of facilitation staff as 
needed/assigned. The Lead Play Facilitator position reports directly to the Museum 
Experience Manager.  
Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitators (FT) 
 
The Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitator position is a combination of two key 
visitor experience positions at the Museum: Learning Labs Facilitator and the Play 
Facilitator positions. They are responsible for assisting both the Museum Experience 
Manager and STEM Specialist and School Programs Manager with overseeing the 
Museum floor, school programs, field trips, and daily/special event programming. They 
are tasked with facilitating the child/adult visitor interaction with exhibits and on/offsite 
programs by encouraging and modeling the importance of open-ended and multiple 
outcome experiences. They maintain a safe, educational, hospitable, and aesthetically 
pleasing museum/outreach environment. The Lead Learning Labs and Play Facilitators 
assist in the training, mentoring, observation, and evaluation of facilitation staff as 
needed/assigned. This position is supervised by the Museum Experience Manager, 
School Programs Manager, and Assistant School Programs Manager.  

142 
 
Play Facilitators (PT) 
The Play Facilitators report directly to the Museum Experience Manager and are 
responsible for facilitating the child/adult visitor interaction with exhibits and daily/special 
programming by encouraging and modeling the importance of open-ended and multiple 
outcome experiences. They are tasked with maintaining a safe, educationally sound, 
hospitable, and aesthetically pleasing environment at the Museum. Play Facilitators are 
responsible for floor operations, visitor safety, and exhibit/program readiness. They 
maintain the cleanliness of exhibits and program materials. In addition, they assist in 
mentoring volunteers.  
 
 

143 
 
APPENDIX B – Peer Museum Interview Questions 
General Questions 
● Name & Title 
● Museum Size (staffing & exhibits) 
● What is your annual attendance? 
● How many staff members does your institution have?  
● What does ‘accessibility’ mean to your institution?  
● What does ‘inclusion’ mean to your institution? 
● Does your institution have an inclusion statement?  
○ If so, how do you share this statement with staff and visitors?  
 
Staff and Training 
● What individuals from your institution are responsible for creating and 
maintaining accessibility resources and/or programs?  
● Are these efforts delegated to a certain department or shared by multiple?  
● Do you have a member of your staff that is directly related to accessibility or 
inclusion? 
● Has your institution implemented accessibility related training for staff?  
○ If so, how regularly is this a focus in your training?  
○ If not, is this something your institution would like to implement?  
 
Programs and Resources 
● Does your institution have daily programming?  
● How does accessibility and inclusion impact the planning process for programs 
and events?  
○ Does your institution provide modifications or resources for programs to 
make them more inclusive for individuals with autism spectrum disorder?  
○ Do you feel that your staff has the tools necessary to introduce inclusive 
strategies during programs?  
● What types of accessibility resources does your institution have available? How 
do visitors access these resources?  
● Does your institution have programs or events specifically designed for 
individuals with disabilities? 
● What efforts outside of “sensory friendly” events are your institution making to 
create a more inclusive experience for their visitors with autism spectrum 
disorder?  
○ Does your institution have any camps, classes, or accommodations 
specifically designed for children on the autism spectrum?  
 
Funding and Support 
● How does your institution fund accessibility or sensory friendly events or 
programs?  
● How does your institution fund accessibility resources?  
● Does your institution consult with other individuals or organizations in the 
community regarding accessibility and inclusion?  
● How did these relationships begin? How do you maintain them?  

144 
 
● What do you think is the greatest barrier your institution faces regarding 
accessibility and inclusion? 
● What do you think is your institutions greatest strength regarding accessibility 
and inclusion?  
Basic 
● Are you comfortable sharing your responses, cited appropriately, within this 
research project?  
● Would you prefer for your institution and yourself to remain anonymous?  
● Would you like me to send a copy of the finished thesis to you? 
 
 

145 
 
APPENDIX C - Survey Participant Recruitment Flyer 
 
Project Title: Creating Inclusive Experiences in Children's Museums: Programming and 
Resources for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder  
 
Researcher: Cassandra Coffey, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
 
Study Location: [study site] 
 
This study is being conducted in part to fulfill requirements for a Master of Science in 
Anthropology degree in the Anthropology program at the graduate school of University 
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  
 
The purpose of the Accessibility & Inclusion survey is to identify the motivations and 
needs of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and their adult counterparts 
when visiting a children’s museum. No risks are anticipated and participating gives you 
an opportunity to help the researcher understand how children's museums may become 
more inclusive to children with autism spectrum disorder. 
 
 Participating involves completing an online survey that will take approximately 15 
minutes. Your responses will be confidential and no identifying information will be 
collected. All data is stored in a password protected electronic format, and responses 
are anonymous. The results of this survey, not including information that may personally 
identify you, will be used for scholarly purposes and may be shared with [study site] 
representatives. 
 
Your participation in this survey is voluntary, and you may withdraw at any time.  
 
Please inform the researcher if you would like to provide an email address to 
participate in the Accessibility & Inclusion survey.  
 
If you have questions or concerns about this research, please contact: Cassandra 
Coffey; 608-214-7020; cscoffeyuwm@gmail.com. 
 
 

146 
 
APPENDIX D– Survey Participant Sign-Up Form  
 
Accessibility & Inclusion Survey Participants 
 
The purpose of the Accessibility & Inclusion survey is to identify the motivations and 
needs of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and their adult counterparts 
when visiting a children’s museum.  
 
Your participation is this survey is voluntary. You may choose not to participate. If you 
decide to participate in this survey, you may withdraw from participating at any time, you 
will not be penalized. Participating involves completing an online survey that will take 
approximately 15 minutes. Your responses will be confidential and no identifying 
information will be collected. All data is stored in a password protected electronic 
format. The results of this survey, not including information that will personally identify 
you, will be used for scholarly purposes and may be shared with [study site] 
representatives.  
 
You will receive the survey within two weeks of submitting your email address. Please 
write your email address below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

147 
 
APPENDIX E – Accessibility & Inclusion Survey Consent Form  
 
Thank you for your interest in taking part in this research. Before you agree to take part, 
please read the consent form below.  
 
Project Title: Creating Inclusive Experiences in Children's Museums: Programming and 
Resources for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder 
 
Student Principal Investigator: Cassandra Coffey, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
 
Principal Investigator: Dr. William Wood, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
 
This study is being conducted in part to fulfill requirements for a Master of Science in 
Anthropology degree in the Anthropology program at the graduate school of University 
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  
 
The purpose of the Accessibility & Inclusion survey is to identify the motivations and 
needs of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and their adult counterparts 
when visiting a children’s museum. No risks are anticipated and participating gives you 
an opportunity to help the researcher understand how children's museums may become 
more inclusive to children with autism spectrum disorder. 
 
Participating involves completing an online survey that will take approximately 15 
minutes. Your responses will be confidential and no identifying information will be 
collected. All data is stored in a password protected electronic format, and responses 
are anonymous. The results of this survey will be used for scholarly purposes and may 
be shared with [study site] representatives. 
 
Your participation in this survey is voluntary. You may choose not to participate. If you 
decide to participate in this survey, you may withdraw at any time. If you decide not to 
participate in this survey or if you withdraw from participating at any time, you will not be 
penalized. 
 
If you have questions or concerns about this research, please contact: Cassandra 
Coffey; (608) 214-7020; cscoffeyuwm@gmail.com or Dr. William Wood; (414) 229-
6323; woodw@uwm.edu 
 
If you have questions about your rights or complaints towards your treatment as a research 
subject, please contact: UWM IRB at 414-229-3173 or irbinfo@uwm.edu 
 
Research Subject’s Consent to Participate in Research:  
By completing this survey, you are indicating that you have read the consent form, you are 
age 18 or older and that you voluntarily agree to participate in this research study. 
 
 
 

148 
 
APPENDIX F – Accessibility & Inclusion Survey Questions 
 
Basic Information 
This survey includes questions and responses that use the wording "the child". This 
wording is used to generalize the survey for use with parents, guardians, teachers, 
therapists, etc. Please answer the following questions about the child or children with 
autism spectrum disorder that you have a relationship to. 
 
Child’s Age and Identified Gender: (short answer) 
 
Relationship to Child: (parent / guardian; teacher; therapist; other) 
 
Has the child been diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder? (yes; no; other) 
 
Has the child visited a children’s museum before? (yes; no; other) 
 
Motivations  
 
Please rate the following motivations for visiting a children’s museum from (1) not 
important to (5) very important.  
 
● To be entertained 
● To spend quality time with classmates, family, and/or friends 
● To interact in an unfamiliar and/or stimulating environment 
● To relax and/or recover from stress 
● To connect to what the child is learning in school 
● To learn or to be mentally stimulated 
● For social and/or physical therapy 
● To have a change in the child’s daily routine 
● To connect the child to an area of their interest 
● To introduce the child to other children who do not have ASD or other disabilities 
● To introduce the child to children who do have ASD or other disabilities 
 
Are there other motivations for you and the child to visit a children’s museum? (short 
answer)   
 
Tools, Resources, and Environmental Modifications  
Do you prepare with the child prior to visiting a children’s museum? (yes; no; other) 
 
How do you prepare with the child prior to visiting a children’s museum? (no preparation 
prior to visit; other) 
 
Do you visit a museum’s webpage for accessibility information prior to visiting? (yes; no; 
other) 
 

149 
 
Please rate the following tools, resources, and environmental modifications from (1) not 
helpful to (5) very helpful.  
● If available resources are listed online via museum website 
● Description of exhibits available online via museum website 
● Semi-private museum time (museum is closed to public, but open for children 
with disabilities and their families) 
● Inclusive educational programs (classes & camps designed specifically for 
children with disabilities) 
● Quiet rooms and/or spaces 
● Noise-reducing headphones 
● Timers, personal schedules, etc.  
● Stories, picture guides, etc.  
● Sensory maps that indicate areas with bright lights, loud noises, etc. 
● Recommendations for therapeutic uses of exhibit areas 
● Tactile, sensory, or fidget toys 
● Pressure vests, neck wraps, weighted blankets, or lap pads 
● Filtered lighting 
● Flexible seating (bean bag chairs, wobble seats, rocking chairs, etc.) 
● Service or comfort animals 
 
Are there any additional tools, resources, and/or environmental modifications that are 
helpful when visiting a children’s museum? (short answer) 
 
[Study Site] Environment & Programs 
 
What aspects of the Museum environment at [the study site] support a positive 
experience for the child? (short answer) 
 
What aspects of the Museum environment at [the study site] create barriers for the 
child? (short answer) 
 
When considering the child’s needs and your family’s schedule, what times during the 
week work best for a visit to the Museum? (Select all that apply) 
 
What is the approximate amount of time the child is comfortable participating in an 
environment like [the study site]? (multiple choice) 
 
Has the child participated in any classes, camps, and/or programs at [the study site]? 
(Yes / No / Interested / Not Interested) 
 
What aspects of classes, camps, and/or programs create barriers for the child? (short 
answer) 
 
Do you have any interest in participating WITH the child in class, camp, or program? 
(yes; no; other) 
 

150 
 
Would you or the child be interested in a class, camp, or program that involves the 
entire family? (yes; no; does not apply; other) 
 
What is the approximate amount of time the child is comfortable participating in a class, 
camp, or program environment? (multiple choice) 
 
What topics or themes would the child find most interesting for a class, camp, or 
program? (short answer) 
 
If a [study site] instructor is present, would the child be comfortable participating in a 
class, camp, or program without their parent or guardian present? (multiple choice) 
 
 

151 
 
APPENDIX G – Observation Worksheet 
Observation Type / Number:   
Observation Date:  
Event / Program:  
Exhibit Area / Museum Location:  
Start Time:  
End Time:  
Duration:  
Participants (# of, age range) 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities:  
Motivations: 
Tools / Resources / Modifications: 

152 
 
APPENDIX H – Observation Informational Flyer  
 
Project Title: Creating Inclusive Experiences in Children's Museums: Programming and 
Resources for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder 
 
Researcher: Cassandra Coffey, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
 
Study Location: [Study Site} 
 
This study is being conducted in part to fulfill requirements for a Master of Science in 
Anthropology degree in the Anthropology program at the graduate school of University 
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  
 
The purpose of these observations is to identify how the environment of daily drop-in 
programs and/or museum accessibility events may positively or negatively affect 
children with autism spectrum disorder. No risks are anticipated and participating gives 
you an opportunity to help the researcher understand how children's museums may 
become more inclusive to children with autism spectrum disorder. 
 
Adults and children will be observed. No identifying information will be collected during 
observations. The total number of participants and their perceived age range will be 
noted. Focus of the observation is on the program and/or event environment; the facial 
expressions, body language, and statements of participants; and program tools, 
resources, and activities. 
 
Your participation in this observation is voluntary, and you may withdraw at any time. 
Please inform the researcher if you do not want yourself or your children 
observed.   
 
If you have questions or concerns about this research, please contact: Cassandra 
Coffey; 608-214-7020; cscoffeyuwm@gmail.com or Dr. William Wood; 414-229-6323; 
woodw@uwm.edu. 
 
If you have questions about your rights or complaints towards your treatment as a 
research subject, please contact: UWM IRB; 414-229-3173; irbinfo@uwm.edu. 
 
 

153 
 
APPENDIX I – Daily Programming Sample 1 
 
Daily Program Type: Storytime 
 
 
 
Developed By: Cassandra Coffey 
Duration: 20 minutes 
 
 
 
 
Location: Gallery 
Materials 
• Visual Schedule (Hello, Story, Song, Story, Goodbye) 
• Large Rug 
• Cube chairs, bean bags, and benches 
• Books 
o Shake the Tree! (Vignocchi, Chiarinotti, and Borando 2018) 
o The Very Hungry Caterpillar (Carle 1969) 
• CDs: Vote for Jim Gill (Gill 2016) 
• CD Player 
• Egg Shakers 
• Felt Board 
• The Very Hungry Caterpillar Felt Story 
• Accessibility Toolkit 
 
Environment 
• Position rug and chairs in the center of the room 
• Doors should remain closed during program 
• Position “Storytime / Okay to Enter” sign outside of the room 
• Position accessibility toolkit on the counter or table near entrance to the room 
 
Lesson Plan 
• [introduce “hello” card] Welcome visitors to Storytime; Remind them that it is 
okay to “wiggle, wander, or leave” [remove “hello” card] 
• [Introduce “story” card] Shake the Tree! w/ Egg Shakers [remove “story” card] 
• [Introduce “song” card] “One from the Left (A Finger Play)” [remove “song” 
card] 
• [Introduce “story” card] The Very Hungry Caterpillar w/ felt board [remove 
“story” card] 
• [introduce “goodbye” card] “Tickle the Clouds” [remove “goodbye” card] 
 
Skills 
• Fine motor (e.g. grasping, shaking, finger play, and tickling) 
• Gross motor (e.g. reaching, waving, crossing the midline, and clapping) 
• Other: learning left vs. right, counting, language development, picture 
recognition, body awareness, etc. 
 
Engagement  
• Shake the Tree! 
o “What animals do you see?” 
o Ask adults to help children pass egg shakers from one hand to the other 

154 
 
• “One from the Left (A Finger Play) 
o Ask adults to participate along with the children during the song and 
demonstrate the finger movements 
o “What other dance moves can your fingers do?” 
• The Very Hungry Caterpillar 
o “What do you like to eat when you are hungry?” 
o Ask children to help identify and move felt pieces onto the board 
 
Notes 
• “Tickle the Clouds”  
o Tickle the clouds, tickle your toes, turn around, and tickle your nose. 
Reach down low, reach up high, Storytime is over, so wave goodbye!” 
 
 
 

155 
 
APPENDIX I – Daily Programming Sample 2 
 
Daily Program Type: Music Time  
 
 
Developed By: Cassandra Coffey 
Duration: 20 minutes 
 
 
 
 
Location: Gallery 
Materials 
• Visual Schedule (Hello, Instrument, Song, Activity, Goodbye) 
• Claves 
• Animal pictures (bear, crab, bunny, turtle, penguin) 
 
Environment 
• Position large rug in the center of the room 
• Position benches away from the center of the room 
• Doors should remain closed during program 
• Position “Music Time / Okay to Enter” sign outside of the room 
• Position accessibility toolkit on the counter or table near entrance to the room 
 
Lesson Plan 
• [introduce “hello” card] Welcome visitors to Music Time; Remind them that it is 
okay to “wiggle, wander, or leave” [remove “hello” card] 
• [Introduce “instrument” card] Tapping Syllables in Names w/ Claves [remove 
“instrument” card] 
• [Introduce “song” card] “Head, Shoulders, Knees, and Toes” [remove “song” 
card] 
• [Introduce “activity” card] Animal Walking [remove “activity” card] 
• [introduce “goodbye” card] “Tickle the Clouds” [remove “goodbye” card] 
 
Skills 
• Fine Motor (e.g. grasping and tickling) 
• Gross Motor (e.g. tapping, reaching, waving, bending, walking, hopping, 
crawling, and waddling) 
• Other: syllables, tempo, body awareness, name recognition, rhythm, counting, 
etc.  
 
Engagement  
• Tapping Syllables in Names w/ Claves 
o Words have different parts when they are pronounced. These are called 
syllables. Give examples (1) egg, (2) wa-ter, (3) el-e-phant  
o After tapping your name, repeat and count the number of taps 
• “Head, Shoulders, Knees, and Toes” 
o Tempo is the rate or speed of something. Music can be played or sung 
at different speeds. We will change tempos while singing and dancing to 
“Head, Shoulders, Knees, and Toes” 
o “What are some other things you can do fast/slow?” 
• Animal Walking 

156 
 
o Ask adults to help demonstrate each animal walk with the children 
o “What are some other animals we can walk like?” 
o Ask children to change the tempo of their animal walk 
 
 
Notes 
• “Tickle the Clouds”  
o Tickle the clouds, tickle your toes, turn around, and tickle your nose. 
Reach down low, reach up high, Music Time is over, so wave goodbye!” 
 
 

