See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/305704648
TOWARDS SMART & INCLUSIVE SOCIETY: BUILDING 3D IMMERSIVE MUSEUM
BY CHILDREN WITH COGNITIVE DISABILITIES
Conference Paper · July 2016
DOI: 10.21125/edulearn.2016.2240
CITATIONS
8
READS
400
4 authors, including:
Miguel Gea
University of Granada
112 PUBLICATIONS   645 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Xavier Alaman
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
112 PUBLICATIONS   850 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Pilar Rodríguez
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
128 PUBLICATIONS   1,614 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Miguel Gea on 22 November 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

TOWARDS SMART & INCLUSIVE SOCIETY: BUILDING 3D 
IMMERSIVE MUSEUM BY CHILDREN WITH COGNITIVE 
DISABILITIES  
M. Gea1, X. Alaman2, P. Rodriguez2, V. Rodriguez1 
1 Dpt. Lenguajes y Sistemas Informáticos. Universidad de Granada (Spain)  
2 Dpt. Ciencias de la Computación e Inteligencia Artificial. 
 Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Spain) 
mgea@ugr.es, xavier.alaman@uam.es, pilar.rodriguez@ii.uam.es, vicentemr@correo.ugr.es 
Abstract 
Smart city is a promising trend where technology may help us to create new smart living places for an 
inclusive society. In such context, mixed reality paradigm (3D immersive world, augmented reality and 
mobile app) is growing faster, and people demand new content layers for different purposes (tourism, 
gaming, learning, etc.). Content creation of for immersive neither augmented 3D interactive world will 
be an important activity for artist and designers. This paper focuses on and specific target group 
(users with cognitive disabilities) and how this new technologies may be potentially suitable to help 
them for a social and labour integration. This paper shows the learning experience of building a virtual 
immersive museum in a school of special education. 
Keywords: Storytelling, mixed reality, inclusive design, smart city, autism, cognitive disabilities, content 
creation 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Currently, we are adopting artefacts and services with the aim of building living places based on the 
smart city paradigm. Information society moves toward interaction society and novel approaches 
based on mixed reality [1] become popular and most demanded technology. Thus, the smart city, for 
instance, is a strategic topic in the H2020 European agenda [1], and most countries have similar 
strategies for IoT adoption [3]. In this approach, most technological advances and services are 
oriented to sustainable model of public services. But on the other hand, enabling the citizen 
engagement is crucial to connect innovation with society needs [4], and one of the key issues are the 
inclusiveness and democratic principles, ensuring solutions endorsed by the entire population, 
considering any kind of collective. This paper focuses on a specific target group (user with cognitive 
disabilities) and how this new technologies may be potentially suitable to help them for a social and 
labour integration. Creativity is a relevant aspect of research on these interactive scenarios, as shown 
using virtual reality to increase the stimuli for student [5], but also for people with behavioral disorder 
or disabilities. These objectives are part of the e-Integra project [6], the Spanish research project in the 
context of the Information Society, particularly in the area of attention to diversity, and focusing on the 
development of technology to provide comprehensive training to people with special needs. These 
people have some limitations that affect their daily activities, making them less independent and 
leading them to a potential risk of social and labour exclusion. These objectives allow children with 
cognitive disabilities to manage technologies based on emerging interactive paradigms and create 
authoring contents for these environments. 
The aim of this project is to develop a collaborative and immersive museum based on virtual reality 
environment for transmedia storytelling created by a collective with cognitive disabilities [7]. This 
activity is supported with the collaboration of Asprogrades [8] and association to facilitate support to 
persons with cognitive disabilities for their social inclusion. This association has a special education 
school and several socio-labour workshops for adult’s socio-labour inclusion with different kind of 
handcrafts works. Creativity is a big deal in their permanent exhibitions as a sustainable funding and 
stand-alone work as shown in figure 1.  
 

 
 
Fig.1. Hand-craft examples done by children with cognitive disabilities and autism spectrum disorders 
 
Some of these children can use computer for some simple task (editing, drawing), but they have not 
knowledge of concepts related with immersive 3D world. Thus, their everyday activities are sequenced 
and printed using pictograms because most of them have severe communication problems. Figure 2 
shows large pictures used in school for planning activities and identify their feelings. 
 
 
 
Fig.2. Communication based on pictograms  
 
In this case, we have to adapt the experience of building the virtual 3D museum to their skills, 
facilitating the learning experience using a step-by-step approach. This experience may be translated 
to other collectives and schools, so a straightforward approach to learning on 3D environments is a 
suitable way to engage children with different kind of cognitive disorder and focus their attention.  
The 3D museum will be done in the Open Simulator [9], an open source platform with similar features 
as Second Life. The users can build their rooms for exhibit their art crafts, put their content and 
interact with others. We will focus on training social interaction [10], enabling the creativity and skills 
related with other deficits (language, emotions, orientation, etc.) to advance in the project. Next 
section shows the case study and relevant features for training. 
 
 

2 
CASE STUDY 
 
The first stage in this project is the collaboration with special education school tutors to select 
candidates for this first training experience. According to these meetings, 10 students were selected 
(two of them on the autism spectrum) for the experience. After the first training session, 5 of them 
were selected to start the first training program. This piloting experience allows us to discover 
references and some approaches to maintain their attention on 50 minutes session in the 3D 
immersive environment. This first training program will be evaluated using desktop monitor with 
mouse, tablets, and one interactive digital board suitable for wider audiences.  
 
Our methodological approach identifies different type of sessions according the goal to achieve in 
each stage of the project. First of all, we propose two exploratory sessions with a set of different 
activities and different child distributions. The aim of this phase is to acquire knowledge about their 
feelings, skills, motivation and difficulties to act in a virtual environment. The second phase focuses on 
each child and how he/she resolves different situations on each training session. According to 
literature [11], common characteristics of students with cognitive disabilities are the following:  
- Disorder of attention and Concentration. Difficulty focusing and maintaining attention on academic 
tasks 
- Memory. Difficulty memorizing numbers, letters, sequences  
- Language. Difficulties with sequencing when telling a story, pronouncing words, expressing ideas 
- Social Skills. Difficulties in interpreting social cues, cooperation  
- Affective skills. Difficulties to express emotions, changes in sense of humour  
- Disorders in behaviour such as hyperactivity, impulsivity  
- Coordination problems  
In this situation, elementary activities on a 3D reference world demands most of these skills to achieve 
the following tasks with different difficulty levels:  
- Walk through and world discovering, acquiring skills for movement, orientation and object 
localization. 
- Character building. Identify their avatars, and personalize according to their preferences,  
- Building activities: create walls, upload media content and putting on it.  
- Communication activities. Manipulating chat and other interactive elements where they can interact 
with the 3D world.  
- Collaborative activities, such as follow a group, meet someone, etc.  
For this purpose, we will use the Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives [12] and the outcomes of 
using virtual reality in autism [13]. Based on these experiences, we propose pool of tasks to discover 
the immersive world in a straightforward approach using a common language, based on pictograms, 
used in the school for other activities. Next section show activities developed on training session. Each 
session is done once each week. 
 
3 
ACTIVITY SHEETS FOR TRAINNING 
 
Following, the set of tasks are organized according to their inherent difficultly levels, and also, the 
child’s autonomy to interact. Two kind of activities were planned:  
- Individual and stand-alone activities. Basic functionality and autonomy.    
- Cooperative and interactive activities used for sequencing tasks and discover the 3D world. 

 
Table 1. Individual Activity Sheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1 shows activities for this session, illustrating the pictogram, an scene explaining the situation 
and a set of skills and the difficulty level. This table is a sheet to use in class before and during the 
session in case of difficulties. 
 
For this fist activity sheet, the session is planned as a focus group (Fig 3) where each child performs 
the task individually, and the rest of student observe how they do it.  The aim is to learn each child 
from others (in sequence) and motivating in each step with applauses when the task is done correctly.  
 
 
Task 
Pictogram 
View 
Skills 
Walk 
 
 
Coordination, 
orientation, attention 
Difficulty: low 
Fly 
 
 
Coordination, 
orientation, attention 
Difficulty: low 
Sit 
 
 
Coordination, 
Difficulty: low  
Wear 
 
 
Coordination, 
attention, memory 
Difficulty: medium 
Appea-
rance 
 
 
Coordination, 
attention, memory 
Difficulty: medium 
Build 
 
 
3D Coordination, 
orientation, attention 
Difficulty: medium 

 
Fig 3 Focus Group session 
 
Motivation and affective emotions are good support to capture attention of child with severe autism 
disorder. On the other hand, repetitive task allow them to give confidence in this new world.   
The second session is based on cooperative and interactive task. In this case, the configuration 
changes and students collaborate in groups using several computers (as shown in Fig 4). In this case 
the virtual reality environment includes locations and objects to interact with them. Children can 
change the appearance of their avatar.   
 
 
Fig 4 Cooperative & interactive session 
 
Table 2 shows the relevant task to manage by groups. They have to interact with objects and 
configure the avatar. In this session, children are capable of recognise different part of the 
environment and surroundings to interact with their avatars. Actions with interactive objects focus the 
attention of everyone on specific action (pick, plant, play) allowing multiple possibilities. This two 
training sessions are enough to identify skills and interaction capabilities of children. Next step is to 
focus on different capabilities (called missions) to acquire expertise on different features dimensions 
(communication, orientation, comprehension and creativity).    
 
 
 
 
 

 
Table 2. Cooperative and Interactive activity sheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once these goals are achieved, next step is to create a pool of tasks facilitating the child motivation 
and proposing some skills to evaluate and improve them. Next section focus on these set of tasks 
called missions. Currently, we are running the project, so we can outline only in some cases.  
 
4 
ENGANGING TO VIRTUAL WORLD: MISSION PLANNING 
 
This part of the project, personal autonomy is more relevant, and thus, individual attitude and 
behaviour are evaluated to detect possible abnormal situations. In addition, each mission improves 
creativity by one additional task to be done during the week in other classes. This activity allows us to 
connect this project with other classes, workshops, and with their teachers, family and friends. Each 
Task 
Pictogram 
View 
Skills 
Talk to 
friends 
 
 
Social skills, language 
Difficulty: medium 
Play/ 
interact 
with fun 
objects 
 
 
Sequence, 
coordination 
Difficulty: medium 
Buy/get 
objects 
 
 
Memory, sequence, 
coordination 
Difficulty: medium 
Pick 
objects 
 
 
Coordination 
Difficulty: medium 
Plant 
 
 
Sequence, memory, 
coordination 
Difficulty: medium 
Map 
location 
 
 
Sequence, 
coordination 
Difficulty: medium 

child uses its own avatar and desktop. Communication preferably is done though the chat, but 
sometimes, they need to talk each other for different reason (happiness, ask for something, etc.). Now 
it is important to identify yourself and know the your location as well as the others. Fig 5 shows the 
configuration of the class (mostly individually) and the virtual meeting.  
 
 
 
Fig 5. Mission: Discover the island   
 
Table 3 shows six planned missions, where three of them are more related with coordination (doing 
activities different level of complexity) and the last three one are related with creativity (building, 
constructing, creating). Each one has an additional activity to do outside class.   
 
Table 3. Missions  
Missions 
Goal 
Tips  
Homework 
Mission 1.  
Discovering 
You are in an island. You have to know 
which things is inside and talk with 
other avatars to find things. Choose 
your house 
Use the map and chat. 
Talk with others. Ask 
some question.  
Draw the island as 
you like it. 
Mission 2.  
Cooperate 
Today is your birthday. Prepare a 
party. Each one must carry some 
object to complete the party (candles, 
globes, gifts..) and sing the song 
Look for these objects, 
remember, 
ordering. 
Add a list of friends. 
Say greetings.  
Draw a picture of 
all your friends on 
birthday party and 
wearing 
their 
avatar clothes 
 
Mission 3: 
Comprehen-
sion 
You want to play with your friends. 
Prepare a Gymkhana: Game based on 
a sequence of steps to win 
(finding/manipulating objects)  
Remember the 
sequence, use 
language to ask, 
express your affective 
emotions 
What 
happened 
today?. Tell this 
story using written 
text 
and 
audio 
recording.  
 
Mission 4 
Create 
Make up and go shopping. You plan to 
create a shop with your friend. Create 
as a Lego game something you like it, 
and put on the shop. Describe it and 
choose one object of your friend 
Build on 3D dimension 
using imagination. 
Check your inventory 
list (things you need to 
build). Explain which is 
the object you like it. 
Draw an object 
you whish build in 
3D world. Explain 
what is it and how 
to use it. 
 
 

Missions 
Goal 
Tips  
Homework 
Mission 5 
Build 
Decorate your house. Add pictures, 
doors, windows, lamps, etc. Invite 
others (by letter) to visit your house 
Decorate it and express 
your preferences. Talk 
each other about the 
house.  
Imagine a friend 
you whish to live in 
this house. Draw 
your friend and 
write how is 
his/her life. 
Mission 6 
Storytelling 
Tell a story about a fictional character 
(a friend you whish you were here). 
Add stories to discover on your house.   
Language, 
Writing, 
voice recording. Adding 
media files.  
Write/record a 
story about 
yourself. 
 
 
Nowadays, we are collecting data about this piloting experience. The motivation and engagement of 
tutors, children and families is highly positive. The aim of this project is to include these activities on 
special education schools as regular task. The use of 3D world using a gamification strategy is an 
excellent tool to increase their abilities of spatial orientation, language, memory and comprehension. 
But on the other hand, it is a powerful opportunity to create contents and stories shared in the digital 
age society (channels, virtual museums, etc).  
5 
CONCLUSION 
This paper shows the process of building an immersive 3D virtual museum by children with different 
range of cognitive disabilities. In this process, we have a running project on a Special Education 
School (Asprogrades) where a group of students has been chosen for a piloting experience of 
creativity in a 3D world. Although the experience is not finished yet, we have some evidences and 
outcomes about this activity: 
- 
Proposal of a systematic approach to creativity of 3D world, using a common language based on 
pictograms and the organisation of activities (training sessions & mission) to integrate in their 
everyday life. 
- 
Creation of sheets (material), tasks and skills to use in the special education school. This 
knowledge can be shared with other schools to use it and promoting virtual meeting experiences.  
- 
 This is a beginning stage to learn storytelling on digital media, by creating sceneries, characters 
(avatars), telling stories and using different narrative media (written, audio). 
 
Future work, once this piloting experience will be finished, will be oriented to the following outcomes:  
 
- 
Creating a website collecting information and sharable resources (toolkit for educators and 
families)  
- 
Create a (web based) virtual Museum where visitor can see collections of drawings of children, 
visit their houses and know their everyday life (with different audio/video media) 
- 
Use alternative media (Google cardboard) to visit stand-alone 3D virtual world.  
- 
Start working on a transmedia storytelling experience using book-crossing, Augmented Reality 
(QR codes in the city) and fictional characters on Twitter to engage citizen to enter in these 
stories, know the authors and increase visibility, with the aims of the social and labour inclusion.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partially funded by the Spanish National Plan of I+D+i (TIN2013-44586-R) Project: e-
Training and e-Coaching for the social and laboral integration. 

REFERENCES  
[1] Azuma, R., Baillot, Y., Behringer, R., Feiner, S., Julier, S. & MacIntyre, B. Recent advances in 
augmented reality. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 2001, Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 34–47 
[2] Manville, C., Cochrane, G. et al., 2014.  Mapping Smart Cities in the EU, Directorate General For 
Internal Policies Policy Department A: Economic And Scientific Policy,  IP/A/ITRE/ST/2013-02  
[3] Yesner Clarke, R. (2013) Smart Cities and the Internet of Everything: The Foundation for 
Delivering Next-Generation Citizen Services, white paper IDC Government Insights #GI243955  
CISCO  
[4] Market Place of the European Innovation Partnership. (2015) Principles and enablers for citizen 
engagement: the experience from the European Innovation Partnership on Smart Cities and 
Communities. Action Cluster: Citizen Focus. Smart City European initiative. Online: https://eu-
smartcities.eu/archives/publications  
[5] Wong Lau, K., Yuen Lee, P.: The use of virtual reality for creating unusual environmental 
stimulation to motivate students to explore creative ideas, Interactive Learning Environments, 
23:1, 3-18, 2015 
[6] Alaman, X., 2013, e-Training and e-Coaching for the social and laboral integration. Spanish 
National Plan of I+D+i (TIN2013-44586-R) Project 
[7] Gea, M., Alaman, X., Rodriguez, P. (2016). Transmedia storytelling for social integration of 
children with cognitive disabilities. Proceedings  3rd International KES Conference on SMART 
EDUCATION AND E-LEARNING, Tenerife, 15-17 June, 2016. Spain    
[8] Asprogrades: Asociación a favor de las personas con discapacidad intelectual, 
http://www.asprogrades.org (accessed on 3th of may  2016) 
[9] OpenSimulator, http://www.opensimulator.org (accessed on 15 jan 2016) 
[10] Ke, F., Im, F.:  Virtual-Reality-Based Social Interaction Training for Children with High-Functioning 
Autism. The Journal of Educational Research, 106:6, 441-461. 2013 
[11]  National Association of Special Education Teachers (NASET)  http://www.naset.org 
[12]  Anderson, L.W., Krathwohl, D.R., Airasian, P.W., Cruikshank, K.A., Mayer, R.E., Pintrich, P.R., 
Raths, J., Wittrock, M.C. (2001). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A revision of 
Bloom's Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. New York: Pearson, Allyn & Bacon. 
[13] Bellani M., Fornasari L., Chittaro L., Brambilla P. (2011) Virtual reality in autism: state of the art, 
Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, Vol. 20, no. 3, pp 235-238. 2011 Cambridge University 
Press 
 
View publication stats

