 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Citation for published version:
Garcia Carrizosa, H, Sheehy, K, Rix, J, Seale, J & Hayhoe, S 2020, 'Designing technologies for museums:
accessibility and participation issues', Journal of Enabling Technologies, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 31-39.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JET-08-2019-0038
DOI:
10.1108/JET-08-2019-0038
Publication date:
2020
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication
Publisher Rights
Unspecified
The final publication is available at Emerald via https://doi.org/10.1108/JET-08-2019-0038
University of Bath
Alternative formats
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact:
openaccess@bath.ac.uk
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 15. Nov. 2024

Designing technologies for museums:
accessibility and participation issues
Helena Garcia Carrizosa, Kieron Sheehy, Jonathan Rix, Jane Seale and Simon Hayhoe
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to report the findings of a systematized literature review focusing on
participatory research and accessibly in the context of assistive technologies, developed for use within
museums by people with sensory impairments or a learning disability. The extent and nature of
participatory research that occurs within the creation of technologies to facilitate accessible museum
experiences is uncertain, and this is therefore a focus of this paper.
Design/methodology/approach – This paper is a systematized literature review and subsequent
thematic analysis.
Findings – A screening of 294 research papers produced 8 papers for analysis in detail. A thematic
analysis identified that the concept of accessibly has nuanced meanings, underpinned by social values;
the attractiveness of a technology is important in supporting real-life usability; and that the
conceptualization of participation should extend beyond the end users.
Social implications – The argument is made that increasing the participation of people with sensory
impairments and learning disabilities in the research process will benefit the design of technologies that
facilitate accessibility for these groups.
Originality/value – An original notion of participation has emerged from this review. It includes the
participation and goals of disabled people but has expanded the concept to encompass museum
personnel and indeed the physical and social spaces of the museums and heritage sites themselves.
This constructs a broad of participation, with different aspects being reflected across the review’s
research papers.
Keywords Participatory research, Assistive technologies, Sensory impairments, Learning difﬁculties,
Accessibility, Museums
Paper type Literature review
Introduction
There has been an increasing recognition of the importance of cultural and heritage sites,
such as museums, within people’s life experiences. More recently this importance has been
acknowledged and explicitly foregrounded for people who may require support to access
and enjoy these sites. This includes people with learning disabilities (Seale and Chadwick,
2017) and those with a visual impairment (Reichinger et al., 2016) or hearing impairment
(Milicchio and Prosperi, 2016). In relation to people with learning disabilities, identified two
potential approaches that might facilitate their access (Seale and Chadwick, 2017):
1.
the development and employment of technologies; and
2.
the implementation of inclusive or participatory approaches to research and design
(Seale and Chadwick, 2017, p. 10).
These two broad approaches have face validity for a broader group of potential museum
users. They can be seen as ways to facilitate access for “casual visitors who are visually
impaired, deaf or who have learning disabilities” (Partarakis et al., 2016, p. 237). The
importance of this issue is reflected in The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Helena Garcia Carrizosa is
based at The Open
University, Heerlen, The
Netherlands.
Kieron Sheehy is based at
the Faculty of Education
and Language Studies, The
Open University, Milton
Keynes, UK.
Jonathan Rix is based at
The Open University,
Heerlen, The Netherlands,
and Inland Norway
University of Applied
Sciences, Lillehammer,
Norway.
Jane Seale is based at the
Faculty of Education and
Language Studies, The
Open University, Milton
Keynes, UK.
Simon Hayhoe is based at
Bath University, Bath, UK.
Received 19 August 2019
Revised 27 November 2019
13 February 2020
Accepted 25 February 2020
DOI 10.1108/JET-08-2019-0038
© Emerald Publishing Limited, ISSN 2398-6263j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

Disabilities (United Nations, 2006), which argues that assistive and digital technologies
have a central role in the lives of disabled people and therefore requires that national
government address the assistive technology needs of their citizens (Borg et al., 2011). In
this context, the term “participatory research” refers to the notion of “end users” being
involved in the development or implementation of technologies within museums and directs
researchers to support such engagement (Wright et al., 2011). Participatory involvement is
relatively common within educational research (Abbott et al., 2011), where it can include
“end users” being active central research team members who are involved in all stages of
the research process. The nature of participatory research, and the extent to which it
occurs, within the creation of technologies to facilitate accessible museum experiences is
uncertain, and this is therefore a focus of this paper.
Review methodology
A variety of methods are used to review and extract data from bodies of research literature.
These range from critical narrative reviews, which seek to identify key papers within a field,
to exhaustive systematic reviews (Grant and Booth, 2009). This research follows a
systematized review approach (Grant and Booth, 2009) that adopts a pragmatic review of
the field, within databases judged to be most appropriate. Unlike a fully systematic review, it
does not claim to be a completely exhaustive review of all publications that would include
examining from a wide or open-ended period, searching grey literature and using the hand
searching of hard copies. Table II outlines the parameters laid out for the review, which was
conducted between January and February 2019. Scopus was chosen as the source for the
review data as it is currently the largest database of peer-reviewed social and scientific
literature. The research reviewed articles in three languages (English, Spanish and German)
to access different cultural sources and acknowledge, albeit with “Western” languages, the
global nature of museum research (Ritvala et al., 2017). Given the rapid development of
recent digital technologies, the review search was focused between 2015 and 2019 to
capture current practices. Key research terms and inclusion/exclusion criteria were defined
(Table I). The search terms represented four broad search categories, whose interaction
reflected the aims of the review.
The initial search produced 294 articles. The abstracts of each of these publications were
then screened in accordance with the explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria by two
independent reviewers. Table II indicates these criteria.
Where an inclusion/exclusion decision could not be made from the abstract alone, the full
article was sourced and screened. The judgements of the two reviewers were then
compared and any disagreement discussed. This occurred for three papers. After this
second filtering occurred eight articles were selected for final detailed review (Appendix 1).
These articles were read in full and a thematic analysis conducted with regard to the goals
of the research. In keeping with a systematized research approach, outcome measures and
weight of evidence were not considered. The thematic analysis was of descriptive accounts
of research within each paper.
Table I The Four categories of search terms
One
Two
Three
Four
Museums
AND
Disability Impairment
AND
Technology
AND
Design
Cognitive impairment
Blind
Deaf
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

Findings
Descriptive analysis
The selected eight studies were conducted across 11 countries: the UK, Spain, Korea,
Greece, Italy, Poland, Sweden, France, Germany, Belgium and the USA. Five papers
(Fonseca et al., 2018; Park et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2018; Fernandez-Villalobos and
Puyuelo, 2018; Yang and Ganz, 2018) did not report the length of the research activities
and when they occurred. The type of technologies developed within the studies are outlined
in Table III. As Table III illustrates, within this focused sample are a variety of research aims,
including creating navigation and spatial awareness tools, location sensitive information,
tactile objects and haptic interfaces. These technologies were developed through a range
of research and design approaches.
Thematic analysis
Three themes emerged from the thematic analysis.
Accessibility has nuanced meanings
The concept
of accessibility is constructed in different ways within
the studies,
foregrounding different, but complementary, motivations and values. For example,
Fonseca’s et al. (2018) research sees accessibility to culture and assistive learning
environments as “fundamental human rights” (p. 941). The purposes of, and audiences for,
accessibility projects can also be framed and influenced through political and economic
Table II The Focus and parameters of the research literature review
Theme
Designing technologies to make museums accessible for people with sensory impairment or learning disabilities
Sub-theme
Usability/Accessibility
Design for All
Questions we
want the
review to address
What it is the nature of participatory research, and to what extent does it occur, within the creation of technologies
to facilitate accessible museum experiences?
Date range
2015-2019
Language(s)
English
Spanish
German
Journal databases
Scopus
Inclusion criteria
For all reviews- papers must be evaluative as well as descriptive- enabling lessons to be drawn from the results
or experiences
Must involve Museums (in or for a museum)
Must involve SI
Must involve LD
Must involve technology
Exclusion criteria
Doesn’t involve Museums
Doesn’t involve SI/LD
Doesn’t involve technology
Keyword terms
Disabilities
Impairment
Cognitive impairment
Blind
Deaf
Technology
Museums
Design
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

expectations. These can create attempts to respond to “the needs of the wider community”
(Raffi, 2017, p. 36), i.e. those previously disenfranchised from museum culture. Raffi’s
(2017) research positions the development of universally accessible provision as a way of
overcoming social exclusion. She sees this as encompassing not simply the museums
physical environment, but also as a transformation of access to diverse cultural contents.
These two “levels” of accessibility can be seen in Hollinworth et al. (2016), where only the
latter seemed possible.
During tours of the house, visitors in wheelchairs stayed downstairs with a book of photos. The
A2H group discussed how we could create an equivalent experience for those not able to get
upstairs and mentioned how important it was to be able to touch, smell, and hear the information.
(p. 22)
The degree to which an equivalent experience is created is important as researchers would
wish disabled users to engage with as authentic an experience as possible. As suggested
in the above quote, this can be influenced by the range of modalities being drawn upon. For
example, Park’s evaluations of haptic, voice and color information (Park et al., 2015) found
increasing this range had positive effects in creating a “realistic feeling” through
telepresence for participants unable to access the physical location.
In relation to accessing cultural knowledge Raffi (2017) emphasizes the need to consider
that “As far as language is concerned, visitors may be unfamiliar with the specific
Table III A summary of the technologies aims and design approaches within the review papers
Article
No.
Technology type
Aim of research
Design approach
1
Augmented Reality (AR) for developing
a Mobile Augmented Reality (MAR)
application
Develop a conceptual model
(MARHIME) to provide guidelines to
developers for a MAR application to be
used in museums by HI visitors
A comprehensive literature review and
validation through expert reviews
2
Indoor video-guide. A location-based
system to serve 3 D multimedia content
for understanding architectural spaces
Proposing a wireless system that offers
3 D virtual content that complements the
visit, using a video-guide based on the
user’s position
The evaluation of the video-guide used
in a museum. Mixed-method:
quantitative analysis of architecture
students’ behaviour, and interviews with
a sample of students
3
Microcontrollers and sensors
The co-creation of multisensory
interactive artworks
Co-researchers working in multisensory,
materials and electronics, workshops
4
Haptic telepresence system: robot
equipped with haptic display (RGB-D
sensor and haptic interface)
To explore art galleries and museums
by using a telepresence robot: giving
3 D tactile feedback of the remote
environment and controllability
Experimental approach to evaluate the
telepresence system performance.
Participants’ questionnaires to
understand users’ experiences
5
Phase 1: exploring the use of
multilingual devices in European
museums. Phase 2: Tobii Pro Glasses 2
for eye-tracking
Evaluating users’ attitudes and patterns
of engagement
Phase 1: Questionnaires sent to
European museums. Phase 2:
Measuring reading patterns and
behaviour of museum visitors (eye-
tracking study)
6
3 D printing replicas
Investigating visitor preference of the
physical properties of 3 D replicas
Mixed-methods approach to examine
user experience
7
Technologies suggested for heritage
sites: 3 D replicas and Augmented
Reality
The paper examines study several
information and signage projects, to
understand and exemplify good
practice
Case studies that examine signage
resources in different heritage sites
8
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) sensors
embedded in smartphones
To provide real time spatial awareness
for BVI visitors that allows them to
navigate independently through public
venues
Field tests with users. Questionnaire for
user feedback
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

terminology used in a given field of expertise” (p. 29). This may lead to disengagement with
the exhibition, and so the author suggests:
[. . .] simplifying the text, breaking texts down into logical chunks or using bullet points may have
a positive impact on museum visits, enabling visitors to dedicate their time on the exhibition
rather than on decoding complex texts. This would make not only the informative elements but
also the whole visiting experience more widely enjoyable and accessible (p. 36)
These examples illustrate using technology to help access the physical space, the sensory
experience of the exhibits and the mediation of cultural knowledge through text, audiovisual
information and symbols. In parallel to visions of creating museums that are universally
accessible, which resonates with ideas of universal design, are accounts of accessibility
that are personal and made with and for the individual (Fernandez-Villalobos and Puyuelo,
2018). Another complementary aspect of accessibility is the notion of emotional
accessibility (Garcia Carrizosa, 2019), which is implied is several studies (Hollinworth et al.,
2016;
Fernandez-Villalobos
and
Puyuelo,
2018;
Raffi,
2017).
For
example,
within
Hollinworth’s et al. (2016) research, the participatory engagement of users within the
research process was personally significant. Feedback from co-researchers indicated that
they had
[...] found the opportunity to be involved in research to be an enjoyable and empowering one (p. 36)
This increased their emotional connection, and meaningful engagement, with the museum
and its artifacts and cultural activities. Fernandez-Villalobos and Puyuelo (2018) argues that
creating accessibility requires
[. . .] a sensitive perception of the environment and people in their various situations. We must
start to deal with this binomial connection in a cautious, respectful way, based on observation
and harmony[. . .]. A compatible accessibility criterion must be created, which respects the
unique character of each place; namely the search for balance. (p.19)
It can be seen that in creating accessible museum experiences, researchers have
emphasized different facets of users experience of accessibility, and for Villalobos, this
includes respect for the environment that is being accessed.
Real-life usability
All of the reported technologies demonstrated the potential for enhancing or even
transforming the experiences of museum “users” (Sheehy et al., 2019). An emerging theme
captured the ways in which the potential benefits of a technology were reflected in terms of
everyday usability. For example, in terms of ‘flexibility, ease of use and learnability [. . .]”
(Baker et al., 2018, pp. 020031-4), which allows technology to be used independently
(Yang and Ganz, 2018). However, users must enjoy this use. Therefore, improving their
enjoyment may improve the relationship that a user has with the technology and the
museum experience. This relationship can limit, or enhance, usability for all (Fonseca’s
et al., 2018). For example, in one paper, the interface was “[. . .] the most criticized aspect
by students with certain difficulties[. . .] [and also by] [. . .] the rest of students [. . .]”
(Fonseca’s et al., 2018). When it comes to design, this suggests that creating effective
access to the physical or knowledge components of museums (described in the first theme)
needs to consider the preferences of the users. There is a relationship between the users’
enjoyment of technologies, their access preferences and the real-life usability of the
technology. This aspect of design in facilitating access appears relatively under researched
(Fonseca’s et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2018) and emerges as a key area in improving real life
usability (Wilson et al., 2018). The attractiveness (enjoyment, access preferences and
usability) of a technology drives its everyday usability, and it seems reasonable to argue
that this attractiveness needs to represent benefits for both the primary users and museum
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

staff. While the technological benefits of a technology are often stated in the review papers,
evidence for attractiveness, and hence real-life usability, appears to be lacking overall.
The nature of participation and participants
A theme that emerged across the studies captured the different ways in which participants
were involved, or not, with the research. This theme also encompasses the degree to which
heritage site and museum staff and organizations are involved within the research and
development of the technologies. This aspect of participation appears to be relatively
limited and may reflect the sample papers’ focus towards developing new technologies,
rather than evaluating in situ implementations with museum partners. Consequently,
museums appear mainly as an inert space where research occurs rather than as site of
active research partners. The exception to this is Hollinworth et al. (2016), where museum
staff, researchers, potential end users and volunteers were involved in the co-creation of
accessible artefacts. In two other studies museums staff returned questionnaire (Raffi,
2017) and assisted in data collection (Wilson et al., 2018).
The involvement of participants [i.e. end users of technologies] with sensory impairment
and/or learning disabilities in the research process is illustrated in Table III. This shows that
end users were involved in four research studies (Fonseca et al., 2018; Hollinworth et al.,
2016; Park et al., 2015; Yang and Ganz, 2018), albeit as a small minority in (Fonseca et al.,
2018) and (Park et al., 2015). No end users involved Baker’s et al. (2018) theoretical review
paper or Studies 5 and 6 (Table IV).
The use of non-disabled “proxies” is relatively common and has been criticized for
producing weak understanding of users’ real-life experiences (Silverman et al., 2015). This
occurred in only two studies in the reviewed sample. In Wilson et al. (2018) and Fernandez-
Villalobos and Puyuelo (2018), the research addresses access for a general population.
The nature of participants’ involvement within the research can be seen as varying across a
continuum. At one end of this continuum would be the participants contributing as co-
researchers (Hollinworth et al., 2016). Next and most common was participants giving
feedback to researchers that might inform improving access (Fonseca et al., 2018; Park et
al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2018). Then, participants whose engagement with artifacts was
monitored and analyzed by researchers, followed by the other end; a researcher only
analysis of heritage sites (Fernandez-Villalobos and Puyuelo, 2018) and an expert review
approach (Baker et al., 2018) in which domain specialists validate particular elements of the
technology. This continuum reflects the degree of active involvement of participants in
influencing the research that is being undertaken.
Table IV Involvement of types of disabled users within the studies
Article No.
End user research participants
Other participants
1
People with hearing-impaired (HI). None involved
N/A
2
4 students with attention deficit hyperactivity (ADHD)
32 architecture students in total, [4 of whom
identified as having ADHD]
3
People with learning disabilities (number of participants unknown)
workshop participants: artists, technologists,
multimedia practitioners, educators, museum
professionals and volunteers
4
5 visually impaired users (2 low-vision; 3 blind)
26 participants in total: 21 were sighted
5
People with sensory impairments. None involved
16 museum visitors
6
Diverse categories of the population
140 museum visitors
7
None specified
Researcher analysis of sites
8
6 blind or visually impaired participants
N/A
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

Discussion
This review set out to explore participation in the context of designing technologies to
support museum accessibility. An original finding has been the emergence of an expanded
and nuanced view of the concept of accessibility. The studies, variously, reflect a
construction of accessibility that is values driven and can operate a different level of
implementation: physical, social, cognitive and emotional, and which respects both the
person and the environment they are seeking to access.
The values underpinning accessibility design are important. Technology becomes able to
enhance the modalities which mediate users experience. This helps create a more
authentic experience, potentially bringing the user closer to previously inaccessible artifacts
and sites. However, it also risks creating an alternative situation in which some disabled
users are confined to virtually mediated experiences away from the physical heritage site
and indeed other visitors (Sheehy et al., 2014). The values that drive accessibility design will
be important in negotiating this tension and there is evidence that some researchers are
positioned to do this (Raffi, 2017; Fonseca et al., 2018; Hollinworth et al., 2016).
Typically, the notion of participation has focused on the involvement of disabled people
within the research process and this review has highlighted a continuum of practices that
exist in this respect (Rix et al., 2019). This continuum reflects the degree of active
involvement of participants in influencing the research that is being undertaken. It is likely
that this continuum also reflects the stage of development and complexity of the technology
that is being designed. Both these factors impact upon the ways in which end user
participants might engage with the research process. Therefore, a simple view of a
participation continuum may be misguided. It is however clear that disabled people, for
whom access technologies are being designed, should feature more strongly within the
research than this review sample indicates. In particular the use of “proxies” for disabled
participants is problematic, denying the user groups a voice in the process and distorting
research conclusions (Silverman et al., 2015). This practice may reflect a simple view of
accessibility, focused on the technology alone, rather than one that is shaped by the
broader purposes of the research and design process. This may also partly explain why the
research participants were commonly identified in terms of a single disability “label,”
matching the technology to a specific disability category. Only one study (Wilson et al.,
2018) took a broader view that considered access for all, more akin to a universal design
perspective.
An original notion of participation has emerged from this review. It includes the participation
and goals of disabled people but has expanded the concept to encompass museum
personnel and indeed the physical (Fernandez-Villalobos and Puyuelo, 2018) and social
(Fonseca et al., 2018; Raffi, 2017) spaces of the museums and heritage sites themselves.
This constructs a broad of participation, with different aspects being reflected across the
review’s research papers.
Conclusion
This research review indicates that a range of innovative technologies are being designed
to facilitate accessibility for museum visitors. Although this is a relatively small sample of
recent research, it includes haptic telepresence robots, multisensory artworks, 3 D
multimedia,
multilingual
devices
and
augmented
reality
applications.
These
new
technologies have the potential to transform the museum experiences for people with
sensory impairment and/or learning disabilities.
The notion of accessibility that has emerged is of a multi-layered concept, underpinned by
values which see accessibility as a fundamental human right and way of delivering
important social goals. While the studies reviewed could all be seen as working toward this
end, the means of achieving this, in relation to research participation, are more varied.
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

Participants were typically involved in giving feedback to researchers rather than being
involved as co-researchers, and although the stage of development or complexity of a
project may mitigate against a co-researcher approach in some cases, the use of non-
disabled proxies implies that more involvement is possible.
Future research that seeks to design museum technologies for people with sensory and
intellectual impairments will need to become more attuned to issues of inclusion and
participation. This will impact on who the researchers are, i.e. the composition of the
research team, and how disabled people contribute to the research process. It will be
important therefore to research the processes that might enable these changes, building on
the relatively few examples that currently exist such as the ARCHES Horizon 2020 project
(Garcia Carrizosa et al., 2019).
The research identifies a lack of involvement with museum staff, i.e. those who would be
supporting the implementation of new technologies in the museum and providing
accessibility support for visitors. If the design process is to be more inclusive and produce
sustainable change within museums, then the possibility of their deeper engagement
should be examined further. The attractiveness (as defined previously of the technologies to
both end users and supporters) is vital if the technology is to have a real-life usability and
have a meaningful impact in peoples’ lives. Having a notion of participation in research
which is broad is likely to support the design of such technologies.
References
Abbott, C. Brown, D. Evett, L. Standen, P. and Wright, J. (2011), “Learning difference and digital
technologies: a literature review of research involving children and young people using assistive
technologies 2007-2010”, available at: www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/departments/education/research/crestem/
steg/recentproj/assistivetech.aspx
Borg, J., Lindstrom, A. and Larsen, S. (2011), “Assistive technology in developing countries: a review
from the perspective of the convention on the rights of persons with disabilities”, Prosthetics and
Orthotics International, Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 20-29.
Grant, M.J. and Booth, A. (2009), “A typology of reviews: an analysis of 14 review types and associated
methodologies”, Health Information & Libraries Journal, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 91-108.
Garcia Carrizosa, H., Diaz, J., Krall, R. and Sisinni Ganly, F. (2019), “Cultural differences in ARCHES: a
European participatory research project – working with mixed access preferences in different cultural
heritage sites”, The International Journal of the Inclusive Museum, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 33-50.
Milicchio, F. and Prosperi, M.C. (2016), “Accessible tourism for the deaf via mobile apps”, Proceedings of
the 9th ACM International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments
(PETRA’16) in Corfu, ACM, art No. 23.
Partarakis, N., Klironomos, L., Antona, M., Margetis, G., Grammenos, D. and Stephanidis, C. (2016),
“Accessibility of cultural heritage exhibits”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, ), Vol. 9738, pp. 444-455.
Reichinger, A., Fuhrmann, A., Maierhofer, S. and Purgathofer, W. (2016), “Gesture-based interactive
audio guide on tactile reliefs”, Proceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS ‘16) in Reno, NV, ACM, pp. 91-100.
Ritvala, T., Piekkari, R., Franck, H., and Granqvist, N. (2017), “The international expansion of an art
museum: Guggenheim’s global – local contexts”, in Ibeh, K., Tolentino, P., Janne, O. and Liu X. (Eds),
Growth Frontiers in International Business, The Academy of International Business, Palgrave Macmillan,
Cham.
Rix, J., Garcia Carrizosa, H., Seale, J., Sheehy, K. and Hayhoe, S. (2019), “The while of participation: a
systematic review of participatory research involving people with sensory impairments and/or intellectual
impairments”, Disability & Society, Vol. 1.
Seale, J. and Chadwick, D. (2017), “How does risk mediate the ability of adolescents and adults with
intellectual and developmental disabilities to live a normal life by using the internet?”, Cyberpsychology:
Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, Vol. 11 No. 1.
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

Sheehy, K., Garcia Carrizosa, H., Rix, J., Seale, J. and Hayhoe, S. (2019), “Inclusive museums and
augmented reality. Affordances, participation, ethics and fun”, The International Journal of the Inclusive
Museum, Vol. 1.
Sheehy, K., Ferguson, R., and Clough, G. (2014), “Augmented education: bringing real and virtual
learning together”, Digital Education and Learning, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Silverman, A.M., Gwinn, J.D. and Van Boven, L. (2015), “Stumbling in their shoes: disability simulations
reduce judged capabilities of disabled people”, Social Psychological and Personality Science, Vol. 6
No. 4, pp. 464-471.
United Nations (2006), “Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities”, available at: www.un.org/
disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml
Wright, J.A., Sheehy, K., Parsons, S., and Abbott, C. (2011), Guidelines for Research into the
Effectiveness of Assistive Technologies (at), Kings College London/De Montford University, Leicester.
Appendix
List of articles in alphabetical order
1.
Baker, E.J., Bakar, J.A.A. and Zulkifli, A.N. (2018), Mobile augmented reality for hearing
impaired museum engagement (MARHIME): a conceptual model, AIP Conference
Proceedings, Vol. 2016 No. 1. AIP Publishing, p. 020031.
2.
Fonseca, D., Navarro, I., de Renteria, I., Moreira, A.F. and de Reina, O. (2018),
Assessment of wearable virtual reality technology for visiting world heritage buildings:
an educational approach, Journal of Educational Computing Research, Vol. 56 No. 6,
pp. 940-973.
3.
Hollinworth, N., Allen, K., Hwang, F., Minnion MBE, A. and Kwiatkowska, G. (2016),
Interactive sensory objects for and by people with learning disabilities, The
International Journal of the Inclusive Museum, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 21-38.
4.
Park, C.H., Ryu, E.S. and Howard, A.M. (2015), Telerobotic haptic exploration in art
galleries and museums for individuals with visual impairments, IEEE Transactions on
Haptics, Vol. 8 No. 3, pp. 327-338.
5.
Raffi, F. (2017), Full Access to Cultural Spaces (FACS): mapping and evaluating
museum access services using mobile eye-tracking technology, Ars Aeterna, Vol. 9
No. 2, pp. 18-38.
6.
Wilson, P.F., Stott, J., Warnett, J.M., Attridge, A., Smith, M.P., Williams, M.A. and
Warwick Manufacturing Group (WMG). (2018), Museum visitor preference for the
physical properties of 3 D printed replicas, Journal of Cultural Heritage, Vol. 32,
pp. 176-185.
7.
Fernandez-Villalobos, N. and Puyuelo M. (2018), Perception and wayfinding at cultural
sites, International Journal of Visual Design, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 19-34.
8.
Yang, Z. and Ganz, A. (2018), A sensing framework for indoor spatial awareness for
blind and visually impaired users, IEEE Access, Vol. 7, pp. 10343-10352.
Corresponding author
Helena Garcia Carrizosa can be contacted at: helena.garcia-carrizosa@open.ac.uk
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
j JOURNAL OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIESj

