heritage
Article
Accessibility, Natural User Interfaces and Interactions in
Museums: The IntARSI Project
Eva Pietroni 1,*, Alfonsina Pagano 1, Luigi Biocca 1
and Giacomo Frassineti 2


Citation: Pietroni, E.; Pagano, A.;
Biocca, L.; Frassineti, G. Accessibility,
Natural User Interfaces and
Interactions in Museums: The
IntARSI Project. Heritage 2021, 4,
567–584. https://doi.org/10.3390/
heritage4020034
Academic Editor: Nicola Masini
Received: 26 January 2021
Accepted: 1 April 2021
Published: 4 April 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1
CNR ISPC, Reseacrh Area Rome 1, via Salaria km 29,300, 00015 Monterotondo, Italy;
alfonsina.pagano@ispc.cnr.it (A.P.); luigi.biocca@cnr.it (L.B.)
2
Venue in Rome, IULM University, via Marco Minghetti 17, 00187 Rome, Italy; giacomo.frassineti@gmail.com
*
Correspondence: eva.pietroni@cnr.it; Tel.: +39-06-90672349
Abstract: In a museum context, people have speciﬁc needs in terms of physical, cognitive, and
social accessibility that cannot be ignored. Therefore, we need to ﬁnd a way to make art and culture
accessible to them through the aid of Universal Design principles, advanced technologies, and suitable
interfaces and contents. Integration of such factors is a priority of the Museums General Direction
of the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage, within the wider strategy of museum exploitation.
In accordance with this issue, the IntARSI project, publicly funded, consists of a pre-evaluation and
a report of technical speciﬁcations for a new concept of museology applied to the new Museum
of Civilization in Rome (MuCIV). It relates to planning of multimedia, virtual, and mixed reality
applications based on the concept of “augmented” and multisensory experience, innovative tangible
user interfaces, and storytelling techniques. An inclusive approach is applied, taking into account the
needs and attitudes of a wide audience with different ages, cultural interests, skills, and expectations,
as well as cognitive and physical abilities.
Keywords: technologies for museums; accessibility; universal design; natural interaction interfaces;
tangible user interfaces; art and culture
1. Introduction: Scope of the Action and General Context in Which It Has Been Started
1.1. Premises
From more than twenty years of research, the Virtual Heritage Lab (VHLab) of the
Italian National Research Council, Institute of Heritage Science (CNR ISPC) has been
involved in shaping, developing, and implementing multifaceted virtual museum environ-
ments through technological installations, communicative strategies, and layout design;
the general aim has always been to enhance cultural contents and storytelling to educate
and emotionally involve museum visitors.
Recently, the VHLab team has developed a Universal Design (UD)–oriented strategy to
shape technology, interfaces, and contents, taking into account a larger potential audience
of visitors with differentiated needs and expectations.
The Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage (MIBACT) has established a long-term
strategy [1] for the revitalization of the national museums’ network and exploitation of
various cultural contexts for the beneﬁt of a wider audience. Within this strategy, some
relevant museums were funded to redesign their spaces’ layout, including digital and
technical installations, in order to make exhibits more attractive to an extended audience.
One of the museums that took advantage of such a renovation is the Museum of Civilization
in Rome (MuCIV). Recently it has been opened to the public after a long process of
aggregation of four previous institutions (Early Middle Ages Museum, Popular Arts and
Traditions Museum, Ethnographic Museum, Eastern Art Museum). The new museum is
very rich in content, but unfortunately it is located in a marginal tourist area of Rome with
plenty of ofﬁces rather than tourist attractions, but with great potentialities. The museum
is deﬁning new promotional strategies aimed at reaching a new public: not a mass one,
Heritage 2021, 4, 567–584. https://doi.org/10.3390/heritage4020034
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/heritage

Heritage 2021, 4
568
but focused on speciﬁc targets. It has a multicultural vocation, represented by artifacts and
intangible heritage related to dominant or fragile anthropological contexts, aristocratic and
popular, and coming from all over the world. Consistent with this vocation, the choice to
connote itself as a museum grounded on the ethical principles of social inclusiveness and
accessibility seems a promising perspective.
1.2. Goal of the Contribution
On occasion of the IntARSI project, funded by the Lazio region, the VHLab team
encouraged and supported the new museological approach based on physical and multi-
media inclusivity and accessibility; it was involved by MuCIV to design several multimedia
solutions in order to enhance collections along the exhibition pathway.
Our proposal is based on theoretical background and practical guidelines we have
evolved along more than twenty years of research and concrete experience in museum
studies and virtual heritage projects (communicative media for cultural heritage, new forms
of storytelling and paradigms of interaction, user experience design), supported by the
results of surveys carried out on thousands of European museums visitors [2–6].
Beside, the project also involved very experienced consultants in museum communi-
cation for people with visual, hearing, and motor disabilities. Indeed, accessibility experts
have oriented our contribution towards the adaptation of our methodologies and ideas to
the principles of UD. Thus, the solutions proposed here are the result of a broad cooperation
validated on the basis of everyone’s previous know-how. We believe that the process of
innovation of this contribution springs from the merge of so many experiences, resulting in
a holistic approach, where the whole result is greater than the sum of the parts.
This paper illustrates the approach, the developed content, and the outputs based on
the initial criteria and scope. The research presented here is the ﬁrst step of a wider process,
which focuses on the pre-evaluation, design, and technical speciﬁcations. Hopefully, it shall
continue in the future with the concrete execution of works (second step) and with the user
experience evaluation (third step).
1.3. Structure of this Contribution
In Section 1 we present the goal of this research, its background in terms of competen-
cies involved, general context in which it has been started, and its innovative value.
In Section 2 we present the topic of multimedia accessibility in museums, introducing
some guidelines to enrich the experience as much as possible for a wider audience, favoring
collective and individual dimensions. We also introduce Universal Design principles,
discussing how they have been evolved and applied in the European and Italian contexts,
and how they can be integrated in the general user experience design.
Section 3 presents the IntARSI project, venues and collections interested in the project,
and methodological approach.
Section 4 illustrates a couple of proposed solutions, showing how new technological
devices can meet the public’s expectations as well as cognitive needs. The focus is mainly
on tangible interface applications that would be ideal for all users, especially people with
physical diseases, and natural interaction interfaces.
Section 5 concludes the contribution proposing future improvements and announcing
the realization phase of the IntARSI project, as well as suggesting the application of a
user-centered approach in designing inclusivity for museum contexts.
2. Accessibility of Multimedia Contents in Museums
The main challenge to be faced today in cultural venues is to create a closer synergy
and interconnection between (a) real collections, (b) digital contents, (c) storytelling, and
(d) audiences, in order to create new scenarios related to the cultural experience (Figure 1).

Heritage 2021, 4
569
Heritage 2021, 4 FOR PEER REVIEW  
3 
 
 
2. Accessibility of Multimedia Contents in Museums 
The main challenge to be faced today in cultural venues is to create a closer synergy 
and interconnection between (a) real collections, (b) digital contents, (c) storytelling, and 
(d) audiences, in order to create new scenarios related to the cultural experience (Figure 
1). 
 
Figure 1. The connection between collections, users, and stories must be encouraged in museums 
to create new scenarios of user experience. 
Multimedia communication is probably the most efficient way to address this chal-
lenge. Indeed, the main goal of translating a physical cultural object into a virtual one is 
not merely the creation of a digital replica of the real object. This process does not per-
tain to objectivity, to the object’s description, or quantity; rather, it is the creation of a 
dynamic space of narratives, relationships, and interactions [7]. What matters is the ex-
perience, what we do with the digital content, the simulation of a multiple and open 
past. The feedback we get from the virtual context modifies our behavior and critical 
sense, and stimulates understanding and the process of attribution of meaning. Thus, 
the process of knowledge is constructed and consolidated [8]. 
This process of contextualization and attribution of meaning to the cultural heritage 
is therefore diachronic, evolving through various cycles of interaction, through variation 
and redundancy, and is different from era to era, from person to person. Many factors 
contribute to the design of a good experience within the exhibition pathway [4]: 
- 
quality of the information and harmonious integration between real and virtual 
contents 
- 
configuration of the spaces, visitors’ flow and viability 
- 
layout 
- 
lighting 
- 
noisiness of the environment 
- 
possibility for the audience to pause comfortably, to sit or stand still during the in-
teraction with the contents 
- 
balance between free interaction and guided experience 
- 
duration of the narrative units and their distribution along the visit path 
- 
communicative rhythm, harmonic coherence of words, images and sounds 
But how can we shape up the exhibition’s layout, the presentation of real and mul-
timedia content, and the interaction interfaces as inclusively as possible? How can we 
make it attractive and accessible to different audiences, including those with specific 
needs? 
According to ISO 9241-11:2018 [9], the term “accessibility” refers to the extent to 
which products, systems, services, environments, and facilities can be used by people in 
a population with the widest range of user needs, characteristics, and capabilities, to 
achieve an identified goal in an identified context of use. 
Figure 1. The connection between collections, users, and stories must be encouraged in museums to
create new scenarios of user experience.
Multimedia communication is probably the most efﬁcient way to address this chal-
lenge. Indeed, the main goal of translating a physical cultural object into a virtual one is not
merely the creation of a digital replica of the real object. This process does not pertain to ob-
jectivity, to the object’s description, or quantity; rather, it is the creation of a dynamic space
of narratives, relationships, and interactions [7]. What matters is the experience, what we
do with the digital content, the simulation of a multiple and open past. The feedback
we get from the virtual context modiﬁes our behavior and critical sense, and stimulates
understanding and the process of attribution of meaning. Thus, the process of knowledge
is constructed and consolidated [8].
This process of contextualization and attribution of meaning to the cultural heritage
is therefore diachronic, evolving through various cycles of interaction, through variation
and redundancy, and is different from era to era, from person to person. Many factors
contribute to the design of a good experience within the exhibition pathway [4]:
-
quality of the information and harmonious integration between real and virtual contents
-
conﬁguration of the spaces, visitors’ ﬂow and viability
-
layout
-
lighting
-
noisiness of the environment
-
possibility for the audience to pause comfortably, to sit or stand still during the
interaction with the contents
-
balance between free interaction and guided experience
-
duration of the narrative units and their distribution along the visit path
-
communicative rhythm, harmonic coherence of words, images and sounds
But how can we shape up the exhibition’s layout, the presentation of real and multi-
media content, and the interaction interfaces as inclusively as possible? How can we make
it attractive and accessible to different audiences, including those with speciﬁc needs?
According to ISO 9241-11:2018 [9], the term “accessibility” refers to the extent to
which products, systems, services, environments, and facilities can be used by people in a
population with the widest range of user needs, characteristics, and capabilities, to achieve
an identiﬁed goal in an identiﬁed context of use.
As a public place of education and culture, the museum encourages collective com-
munication, sharing, and social exchange. The approach in the representation of contents,
languages, and technologies must be chosen to involve groups of people, even heteroge-
neous. This happens, for example, with a video projection or an interactive installation
on a large screen, accessible to several users at the same time: here each of them can
enjoy audio-visual content and can choose to play an active role, taking control of the
system, or to attend as a passive spectator. It is recommended that interactive technologies
facilitate simple and immediate alternation between active and passive participation, so
that the public feels encouraged to switch the roles without being inhibited by technology.
In this way it is possible for users to start socializing and exchanging ideas around that
speciﬁc topic. Additional attributions of social and cultural values can arise from visitors’
interaction [10].

Heritage 2021, 4
570
It is also important that the experience, lived by the passive audience, is sufﬁciently
rewarding in terms of perceptual and narrative involvement, although inevitably condi-
tioned by the quality of the “performance” played by the user who is taking the active
control of the system. These factors largely depend on conceptual and interaction design.
Alongside the social dimension, it is important to convey moments of intimate and
personal reﬂection inside the museum, favoring a deep contact with the artwork. The space,
the contents, and the languages adopted in this case are modeled on visitors aiming
to establish an inner dialogue with the cultural object, seeking the depth to get to the
essence. Another fundamental criterion to reach various types of audiences is multichannel
communication, which is the ability to convey content through different media, languages,
and technologies intended for users of various cultural backgrounds, origins, age, or with
speciﬁc needs. A multisensory approach is also necessary to favor the experience and the
contact with the cultural object, since it is able to convey information, perceptions, and
sensations that can stimulate cognitive and emotional processes. Thus, a multisensory
approach generates embodiment [11], making the users feel part of that world [12].
The research presented here, related to the design of the IntARSI project, is shaped
on these criteria of museology, and it tries to improve the connection among collections,
stories, and audiences, enhancing multicultural, collective, and reﬂective dimensions.
2.1. Universal Design (UD) Principles
The seven principles of UD were ﬁrst developed in 1997 by a working group of
American architects, product designers, engineers, and environmental design researchers.
Their purpose was to deﬁne a framework of best practices to increase the usability of
physical spaces, products, and communication systems, making them accessible to the
largest user categories with different abilities, without special or separate design. The main
beneﬁt of UD is that addressing the divergent needs of special populations increases
usability for everyone. The seven principles are: (1) equitable use; (2) ﬂexibility in use;
(3) simple and intuitive use; (4) perceptible information; (5) tolerance for error; (6) low
physical effort; (7) size and space for approach and use [13].
In December 2019 a new version of the European guideline “accessibility require-
ments for Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) products and services”
(EN 301549) [14] was published to specify functional accessibility requirements applicable
to ICT products and services, to be used in public procurement in Europe. This standard,
compliant with ISO/IEC 17007:2009 (i.18) [15], has been drawn up under the competence
of the authority federated to “Ente Italiano di Normazione” (UNI),—“Tecnologie infor-
matiche e loro applicazioni” (UNINFO), and became part of the Italian national legislation
on 17 December 2020. The document is suitable for web-based technologies, non-web
technologies, and hybrid technologies using both. It includes software, hardware, and
services. Most parts of the principles here established are addressed to improve the acces-
sibility and usability of multimedia applications, and comfort of use, by blind and deaf
people, or by visitors with limited abilities in vision and hearing, visitors in wheelchairs,
and persons with cognitive disabilities. However, they can improve the experience of
all users, generating ease in use and well-being, in accordance with the UD principles.
The proposed general solutions are based on multisensory and multichannel approaches
in communication. This means that information has to be delivered not only by means of a
unique media/sensory solicitation, but more than one. Thus, visitors at the same time can
touch, read, listen to, and look at the same content and, even if one of their senses is not
working well, they can access information using an alternative sensory approach. Some
criteria must be respected, of course, in creating such alternatives. For instance:
1.
Users should be able to autonomously set subtitle layout (position, font size, contrast,
synchronization, background, length).
2.
Audio descriptions of visual content (useful for visually impaired persons) should be
well designed in terms of selection of meaningful content and absence of interference

Heritage 2021, 4
571
with other audio solicitations, possibility to be activated by the user on a predeﬁned
speciﬁc audio channel of the device.
3.
International Sign (IS) language (and national versions) and lip reading should take
advantage of the right size and framing of the human translator, from the back-
ground, from possible subtitle concurrence, and from the right speed of gestures
and synchronization.
4.
Users should be able to customize enlargement of images.
5.
Contrast and brightness regulation should be available functions for visually im-
paired visitors.
6.
The presence of Braille translations needs to respect speciﬁc standards of size and
distance among lines and relief.
7.
The physical layout of the communicative systems (spaces, distances, heights, position
of the interaction interfaces and screens) should be ergonomically designed to allow
access of users in wheelchairs.
8.
Lights, lines or colors, and patterns in relief can be useful to mark the perimeters
of interactive areas where users have to focus their attention on interaction inter-
faces, making them easier to be identiﬁed, especially by visually impaired persons,
but certainly they are useful for everybody.
9.
Tangible user interfaces are of course fundamental in several cases [16,17], and we
are going to discuss them in the following sections of the paper, in relation to the
IntARSI project.
10.
Hardware systems should support speciﬁc sensory disabilities, like assistive listen-
ing devices.
In conclusion, new integrated technological solutions and a multisensory and mul-
tichannel approach provide an opportunity to revolutionize the way art and culture are
experienced, breaking down the architectural and perceptive barriers that still prevent
them from being a truly universal language [18].
2.2. State of the Art of Accessibility of Museum Content, the Italian Experience
Despite the principles of UD, the focus of institutions, designers, and architects was
initially mostly on users with physical difﬁculties and in wheelchairs, thus the legislation
was mainly addressed to measures and prescriptions of space sizes rather than to “solutions
for all”.
Gradually, a growing awareness of a better inclusion of larger users’ needs took
place, also extending to different sensorial and cognitive difﬁculties. Design and solutions
started to encompass additional sectors and human activities as well as building types and
environments. The recent European regulation, just discussed, adopted also by national
laws, is a demonstration of this evolution: the focus is now on the individual’s levels of
ability to perform certain tasks in daily life.
In museums and exhibitions, whose mission is cultural and social growth, accessibility
is not an easy issue to deal with. Indeed, recently they have been transforming in multi-
faceted and dynamic contexts, more conditioned by quick but uneven changing realities,
and also in terms of funding, offers, and audience capacity attractiveness.
Thus, the relevance of the visitors’ expectations and needs has been gradually taking
prevalence on some preservation criteria that were traditionally limiting larger visits to the
monumental areas.
Thus, solutions for accommodating the widest range of users’ needs are strictly linked
to the museum performance evaluation [19–22].
One of the forms in which multimedia and art intertwine is represented by tangi-
ble user interfaces (TUIs) [23]. A TUI is a form of technology aimed at improving users’
involvement, active participation, and accessibility in cultural heritage venues. These inter-
faces, in their multiple and different forms, can be used by a wide variety of users of all
ages and needs.

Heritage 2021, 4
572
TUIs have so far been deployed in multiple museums and cultural heritage sites: some
examples are the interfaces from the MIT Tangible Media Group (tangible.media.mit.edu),
which can be considered the arch-types for all TUIs and a beta-test for this kind of technol-
ogy; the TUIs developed by Gagarin (www.gagarin.is, site accessed on the 3 April 2021) a
company based in Iceland, used in museums all over the world to make the exploration
of the space, physical and virtual, a real and creative experience; or the “Espositore for
All” in Turin, Italy, which allows people with physical disabilities to experience works of
art otherwise inaccessible to them (https://italiapost.it/torino-venaria-espositore-for-all/,
site accessed on the 3 April 2021). A great contribution to the improvement of TUIs in Italy
comes from the Omero National Tactile Museum in Ancona city (www.museoomero.it,
site accessed on the 3 April 2021) [24], with its great collection of printed reproductions of
artworks and maps. The Tactile Museum of Varese (www.museotattilevarese.it/, site ac-
cessed on the 3 April 2021) is an excellent example of accessibility too: it exhibits a collection
of tactile wooden models that reproduce aspects of the landscape, architecture, art, archeol-
ogy, and design. Tactile models have a dual function: didactic and emotional; in addition
to the models, the museum hosts multisensory itineraries and installations, capable of com-
bining fun with an interest in experimentation. The Civic Museum of Natural Science of
Bergamo (www.museoscienzebergamo.it, site accessed on the 3 April 2021) also promotes
a multisensory and inclusive pathway to discover its collections: it is possible to touch
samples of the skin and skeleton of some vertebrates, to manipulate stones and miner-
als, discover the fossilization process with the hands, experience the physical properties
of minerals, and listen to the songs of different bird species. The ancient domus of Via
dell’Abbondanza of Pesaro (www.pesaromusei.it/area-archeologica-via-dellabbondanza/,
site accessed on the 3 April 2021) promotes an inclusive approach: the three-dimensional
reconstructions of the ancient rooms of the domus are projected, allowing visitors to
imagine how daily life took place and to immerse themselves in the atmosphere of the
Pisaurum of the Roman era. The visit path of the archaeological area is enriched with
Braille panels and tactile models for visitors with special needs. In 2020, three tactile
and multisensory itineraries were created in the museums of Belgiojoso Palace in Lecco
(www.comune.lecco.it, site accessed on the 3 April 2021): the Archaeological Museum,
the Historical Museum, and the Natural History Museum. Various stations have been
conceived with tactile maps, captions in Braille, and enlarged characters for the visually
impaired, with faithful reproductions and original pieces. Each tactile station is equipped
with an electronic signal, which activates self-descriptions of the museum hall and of the
elements on display through a specially designed reproducer, delivered to each visitor.
The goal of the IntARSI project is to amplify the impact of multimedia in museums adopt-
ing a multichannel approach in order to involve different audiences in the experience at
the same time. Indeed, the project tries to design an integrated solution to communication,
built on the coexistence of several sensory stimuli in the experience of an artifact, or a
group of artifacts: visual, auditive, tactile. Each kind of sensorial solicitation is provided
through integrated solutions as far as possible. From one side, in the experience design,
we adopt the multi-layered paradigms of virtual museums in terms of high quality of
images and sounds, sensory immersion, advanced storytelling techniques, virtual reality
and embodiment, playfulness, and possibility to deepen the content. On the other side
we implement many communication channels that can sometimes cooperate, other times
work as alternative systems based on synaesthesia principles: touching (instead of looking
at) and exploring a scale model, a replica, or the real object and receiving back properly
designed audio-visual content. Technologies and interfaces are in most cases the same
for all the users, according to UD criteria. Of course, head-mounted displays are not for
blind users, but tangible interfaces can be enjoyed by everyone if following speciﬁc criteria.
Content format can be interactively customized by users according to their needs, in the
same installation, as explained at the end of Section 2.1. In most cases interfaces and
solutions for visitors with disabilities are translated into facilities for a wide public (aged
persons, children).

Heritage 2021, 4
573
In conclusion, with this project we try to encourage the involvement and cooperation
among users around a similar experience without isolating the different targets or impover-
ishing the perceptive and emotional impact of the multimedia experience for any of them.
We expect that this will favor social exchange and individual growth.
2.3. TUI Basic Requirements
TUIs, as well as all forms of technology aimed at improving users’ ways of experienc-
ing cultural content, need to respect some basic principles:
•
Digital interfaces and physical buttons of the TUI need to be easily recognizable,
accessible, and their uses need to be understandable by all users;
•
the main feature of TUIs are the cultural objects, not the technology used for the
system interaction, so their design must be driven by the content to be transmitted;
•
the presence of TUIs needs to be well integrated into museum spaces, without interfer-
ing with visitors’ experience and without appearing as alien elements, but effectively
camouﬂaging into the context in which they are located.
The general use of a TUI is the following: the user is able to touch a replica, or in
some cases the original version, of a speciﬁc item presented on the TUI; this action causes
a system modiﬁcation in status which recognizes the touch and conveys the information
via video, sound, subtitles, or all of them. Depending on the object and its complexity,
touching a speciﬁc part of it will cause the system to convey the corresponding information,
while touching another part will activate another content related to it. This behavior is
common in most of the TUIs. In terms of structure and composition, a TUI is usually
composed of:
•
a surface onto which the object is placed, or better ﬁxed, to avoid dangerous uses;
•
the object—that can be touched and activated;
•
a hardware infrastructure, composed of sensors (placed into the object and allowing
the system to recognize users’ touch and manipulation, which causes the correspond-
ing audio and/or video information to be transmitted), and other computing elements,
such as a Raspberry or Arduino system;
•
a screen or TV through which visual information is conveyed (if present);
•
an audio system;
•
an appropriate illumination system.
2.4. User Experience Design in Museums
It is not easy to create content and experiences that will satisfy a diverse museum
audience. Therefore, it is important to study the museum audience in advance: where they
come from, how culturally and technologically literate they are, what age group they are,
and whether they participate primarily in guided tours or alone, in order to design the best
types of museum experience.
Nevertheless, how is a user experience conceived? It comes from observation, partici-
pation, and interaction with a speciﬁc “sphere of life” [25], in a precise moment.
Experience is made up of non-predictable processes, inﬂuenced by a series of condi-
tions and variables, both objective and subjective [26]. For this reason, experience does not
have the same value for each individual and does not produce the same effects in all users.
Likely, experience includes:
•
all actions and reactions of the user that occur before, during, and after the use;
•
objective aspects raised out of the usage such as usability, effectiveness, visibility, and
efﬁciency of the system and user interface;
•
subjective aspects raised out of the usage such as motivation, critical processing,
memorization, and interpretation.
Experience is the basis of the process of the user’s identity construction, which turns
to be individual but still collective (sociality) [25]. Therefore, it is very important to
understand how, within cultural venues, audiences experience culture.

Heritage 2021, 4
574
3. The IntARSI Project
3.1. Goals, Venues, Target
The IntARSI project stands as a new opportunity for CNR ISPC and the Museum of
Civilization in Rome (MuCIV, main proponent), the Museum of Toys in Zagarolo, and the
Archaeological Park of Ostia Antica (all of them are in Italy, Lazio region), to cooperate in
order to establish virtual and physical connections among intercultural contexts, cultural
objects, and urban and regional contexts. This cooperation has been supported by an
initiative ﬁnanced by the Lazio region aiming at empowering a network of cultural sites
sharing strategies, innovative design and, possibly, audiences, thus incrementing their
cultural offer, attractiveness, and educational impact on local and foreign communities.
As mentioned, CNR ISPC, in collaboration with MuCIV, is primarily responsible for the
design and planning of multimedia content, which has been recently completed; the next
phase will be the development of the digital applications. The sites interested by the
project are:
1.
MuCIV, in Rome, speciﬁcally referring to the Opus Sectile decoration located in the
Early Middle Ages section of the museum; the contemporary African collection,
exhibited in the Prehistoric-Ethnographic section of the museum; and the Figure
Theater objects exhibited in the Popular Arts and Traditions section of the museum;
2.
Archaeological Park of Ostia Antica, specifically referring to the archaeological remains
of the Porta Marina building, and the artifacts exhibited in the Ostiense Museum;
3.
Museum of Toys, in Zagarolo, speciﬁcally about the collection of puppets and mari-
onettes.
The title of the project, intARSi, is inspired by the ancient marble intarsia technique
that characterizes one of the main artworks: the Opus Sectile decoration, at MuCIV, orig-
inally found in the domus of Porta Marina in Ostia Antica. The project partners intend to
recall, metaphorically, the idea of how pieces of precious materials, carved in different
forms, can be skillfully assembled to create something new that, as a whole, enhances the
potentialities of the individual components. IntARSI pertains n.12 multimedia and virtual
productions, based on the concept of “augmented” and multicultural experience, built
on multisensory, immersive, multichannel solutions, aiming at stimulating an emotional
impact on users. In designing the technological applications an inclusive approach has been
applied, which takes into account the needs and attitudes of an audience differentiated by
age groups, cultural interests, skills, and expectations, as well as cognitive and physical abil-
ities. Systems and contents are conceived in order to be accessible, both in terms of usability
and comprehensibility. Moreover, they are shaped and transmitted not only according to
typically didactic communication methods, but also according to a playful and dramatized
approach in storytelling (following the practice of learning-by-doing [27–30]). Technology
naturally integrates with the collections and their spatiality, recreating a “dramaturgy”
around the exhibited objects and reconstructing their sensory and symbolic dimension and
context of usage, according to a new museological perspective. Four main targets have
been considered (Italian and foreign tourists; children and teenagers; experts, professionals,
amateurs; and people with different speciﬁc needs), conceiving installations able to work
with different targets, according to the UD approach. In this way, the museum partners
could guarantee a democratic access to shared, inclusive, and in-depth experiences. For the
same reason, the type of experience enabled by intARSi is twofold: passive, for those
who want to simply attend a show; and active, for those who want to be engaged in the
ﬁrst person.
3.2. Preliminary Study at MuCIV: Self-Assessment Phase
Along with the consideration in Section 2.4, for the IntARSI project we decided to ﬁrst
analyze what happened inside one of the major museums involved, the MuCIV, before
starting the design of multimedia and layout interventions. On one side, we studied
the museum visiting paths, considering how clear the presentation of contents and the
communicative apparatus was, what visitors could ﬁnd, and what they were allowed to

Heritage 2021, 4
575
do from the moment they entered until the moment they left the museum. On the other
side, we investigated who the visitors were, where they came from, how often they visited
the museum, and what their interests, needs, and expectations were. Finally, we studied
if the museum was able to manage users with speciﬁc needs (like sick or elderly persons,
or children as well as people with disabilities).
Observations, questionnaires, and interviews supported this initial study—the so-
called self-assessment phase. We limited the survey to MuCIV because (a) it is the main
proponent and thus it will host several and different multimedia applications; (b) it has the
greatest potentialities in terms of audience development and strategies because it was born
very recently from the fusion of four previous museums and its vocation is to be a cultural
aggregator; and (c) it has already settled few actions in favor of visually impaired visitors;
therefore, there is a sincere interest in increasing UD principle in the museum. On the 3rd
of November 2019, we conducted interviews directed towards visitors and, when possible,
museum staff, on a day of heavy public presence in the museum rooms. This was done in
order to understand which sections were the most visited, the strengths and weaknesses of
the MuCIV, and to get a general idea on the composition of the visitor base. A summary of
the main results is provided below, based on 38 anonymous and voluntary interviews:
•
the audience of the museum is composed of 76% adults (ranging from 26 to 60
years old);
•
the audience comes mainly from Rome, with a small percentage coming from other
parts of Europe (5%);
•
15% of visitors are composed of teachers and university students interested in speciﬁc
parts of the museum;
•
45% of the users visit the museum with their family;
•
73% are familiar with technologies in general;
•
86% would be interested in a more multimedia and technological experience of the mu-
seum.
It was not possible to meet people with any kind of impairment, but we collected
information from the museum’s staff, who periodically organize visits especially addressed
to blind persons in very small groups (1 or 2 persons with companions) supported by expert
guides. The only dedicated physical supports in the museum are Braille panels installed
on some showcases. Apart from these short descriptions, narration of the pieces is totally
entrusted to the human operators. The evaluation allowed us to draft user personas, ﬁctional
characters useful to anticipate the target identiﬁcation, the user experience roadmap inside
the museum, and if and how the different target groups would probably approach the
solutions imagined for IntARSI.
3.3. First Basic Recommendations for the Accessibility to the Museum’s Contents
Within such a general vision, we identiﬁed some initial and basic recommendations
regarding pathways, signs, and overall organization of contents. We summarize here the
main ones:
•
Paths and spaces must be ﬂat or with minimal level differences and obstacles, easily
identiﬁable and recognizable, with comfortable transit also by wheelchairs, with con-
trast colors to highlight room’s change or steps—also for visually impaired people.
This is an existing condition inside the museum. In addition, we proposed to integrate
tactile paving indicators to guide blind users to the multimedia installations placed in
different parts of the museum. These indicators can be useful for all visitors, in order
to orientate their visit towards the intARSi contents.
•
Communication systems should have a clear hierarchy and identiﬁcation/recognition
through short, legible, and easily understandable messaging, and signage with proper
choice of colors and contrasts, type, and font size.
•
Signs must not be hidden by obstacles, neither they can be an obstacle to visibility
and mobility; appropriate legibility from long and closer distance with no lighting
interference and reﬂection to visitors’ sight; proper height installation of signs are

Heritage 2021, 4
576
between 1.30 m and 1.70 m (in particular, signs in Braille must be easily reachable
without effort and without excessively raising the arms); general information panels
should use large font sizes, with a correct graphical balance between background
and text; when necessary they must include a QR code to access their audio version;
inappropriate supports (reﬂective surfaces like glass, shiny metals, mirrors, etc.) must
be avoided.
•
Assistance to visitors by trained staff must be guaranteed to complement the overall
users’ accommodation.
•
A catalogue addressed to impaired visitors could be created to be consulted at the
entrance of the museum, including a tactile guide towards the accessible installations
spread throughout the museum.
4. The IntARSI Technological Proposals
The second phase of the IntArsi project consisted of conceptualizing and designing
some technological solutions which respected the UD principles and the above-mentioned
recommendations. CNR ISPC identiﬁed, among several proposals, three of them as the
most innovative and inclusive:
-
Applications and TUI for the Opus Sectile decoration exhibited in one of the MuCIV
rooms (see Section 4.1);
-
Holographic showcase and its integration with TUI technology for the African section
of MuCIV (see Section 4.2);
-
Holographic theatre and its integrations with natural interaction (NI) interfaces (mid-
air gestures) [31] for the Figure Theater of the MuCIV and the Museum of Toys in
Zagarolo (see Section 4.3).
4.1. Applications and TUIs: The Case of the Opus Sectile Decoration
The Opus Sectile is a formidable piece of early Roman art (IV A.D.) found in the
archeological site of Ostia Antica, and transferred to the Museum of the Middle Ages
(MuCIV) in 2006 [32]. It is a wide marble inlay decoration, extending on three walls and on
the ﬂoor, and it is the best preserved of the Roman ancient world. A room is completely
dedicated to its exhibition, approximately repeating the volume and measures of the
original environment.
Inside this museum’s room for the ﬁrst time, the public will be able to see the ex-
traordinary marble decoration virtually contextualized in the original environment of
the Porta Marina building in Ostia Antica, thanks to a single user-immersive experience
of virtual reality that will be enjoyed through a head-mounted display. The idea is to
alternate the detailed vision of the original artwork in the present room and its virtual
contextualization. Throughout this process of redundancy and variation, comprehension
and knowledge grow up. In the same room, projection mapping can be periodically started,
for a collective experience, on the surface of the marble inlay, synchronized to an audio
surround. The purpose of such a projection mapping is to animate the decorative con-
text, tell its interpretations of iconographies, the execution technique, and the story of its
conservation. Always in the same room a TUI has been designed, useful in particular for
single user experience of blind people. It consists of a physical scale model of the room
and its inlay decoration, with the main lines characterizing the ﬁgures in relief, useful to
understand the grandiosity and the dislocation of the decorative cycle on the walls and
on the ﬂoor. Additional tactile drawings of the main scenes and Braille panels (Figure 2)
support the experience, as they help users to perceive speciﬁc contents/ﬁgures [33]. In this
case, no additional multimedia has been associated to avoid an overload of technologies.

Heritage 2021, 4
577
 
context, tell its interpretations of iconographies, the execution technique, and the story of 
its conservation. Always in the same room a TUI has been designed, useful in particular 
for single user experience of blind people. It consists of a physical scale model of the 
room and its inlay decoration, with the main lines characterizing the figures in relief, 
useful to understand the grandiosity and the dislocation of the decorative cycle on the 
walls and on the floor. Additional tactile drawings of the main scenes and Braille panels 
(Figure 2) support the experience, as they help users to perceive specific contents/figures 
[33]. In this case, no additional multimedia has been associated to avoid an overload of 
technologies. 
 
Figure 2. Opus Sectile room, with all the types of intervention: projection mapping, immersive 
Virtual Reality, tactile experience for blind people. 
Beside, a tangible path of “introduction” to the theme of the Opus Sectile has been 
planned along the corridor leading to the Opus room, with four tangible and interactive 
“stations” that can be used by different groups of users. These TUI stations have been 
conceived as completely accessible. 
4.1.1. TUI Features 
The TUIs designed for the project follow general guidelines regarding the infra-
structure: they will have the same dimensions, i.e., a size varying between 120 × 90 cm 
and 150 × 100 cm, with a top surface placed at 75 cm from the ground to allow the 
Figure 2. Opus Sectile room, with all the types of intervention: projection mapping, immersive
Virtual Reality, tactile experience for blind people.
Beside, a tangible path of “introduction” to the theme of the Opus Sectile has been
planned along the corridor leading to the Opus room, with four tangible and interactive
“stations” that can be used by different groups of users. These TUI stations have been
conceived as completely accessible.
4.1.1. TUI Features
The TUIs designed for the project follow general guidelines regarding the infrastruc-
ture: they will have the same dimensions, i.e., a size varying between 120 × 90 cm and 150
× 100 cm, with a top surface placed at 75 cm from the ground to allow the wheelchair ac-
commodation and an easier accessibility to tangible content. Each TUI will follow the same
usability logic in order to keep a consistency in the user experience roadmap. They will be
composed of:
•
an inclinable monitor placed at 90◦respective to user’s point of view (size 46–55 inches);
•
3D print of the digital replica—or the original—artifact(s) placed and ﬁxed on a slightly
(13–15◦) inclined surface;
•
informative panels of different dimensions (A0, A4, A5, and A3) printed with letters
and superimposed in Braille, useful for (a) general introduction (A0); (b) tactile draw-
ings or Braille text put inside a lateral pocket for alternative accessibility to contents
(A3 and A4); (c) captions under the interfaces on the table (A5);
•
directional audio systems and magnetically induced ampliﬁer. Directional audio is
required since each of the TUIs will be placed in the same corridor in close proximity,
and a normal audio system would produce conﬂicting audio sources;
•
tactile paving systems to guide users to the TUIs;
•
ad hoc illumination system, useful to mark each interactive area/interface and make
them more recognizable;
•
sensors’ interaction system.
Deﬁnitively, six TUIs have been designed for the IntARSI project: ﬁve of them will be
located inside the Museum of the Early Middle Ages, a section of MuCIV; they will intro-
duce the Opus Sectile decoration and the context of prevenience (Porta Marina building);
the sixth one will be located in the Ostiense Museum in the Archaeological Park of Ostia
Antica (Figure 3). Each one will present a particular topic accessible by users through tactile
input on 3D-printed surfaces or objects; the latter will trigger an audiovisual narrative in
the frontal 46′ screen, creating a touch-mediated multimedia experience.

Heritage 2021, 4
578
1 
 
 
Figure 3. On the left: the corridor leading to the Opus Sectile Room where TUIs will be located.
On the right: the standard conﬁguration of a TUI (graphic and technical elaboration in collaboration
with Michele Fucci).
4.1.2. Usability and User Experience Roadmap
With reference to usability, the user approaching the TUI will need to understand
immediately and clearly what he/she can do and how to interact with the tangible elements.
Instructions will ﬁrstly be issued on the A0 panel placed next to the workstation where only
information to let the system start will be indicated (as the choice of language). As soon as
the language is selected on the table (ITA/EN), by two buttons, a simpliﬁed explanation
in infographics will start explaining: (a) welcome to the workstation, (b) introduction to
the topic, (c) what to do and how to access the multimedia contents (start/end/restart),
and (d) timing of use/waiting/timeout. Infographics will be similar in style in all the work-
stations, but different in content according to each TUI. It will be a video in 2D graphics,
accompanied by audio and Italian Language Sign (LIS)/International Sign (IS) [33].
In each TUI station, the activation and interaction with the narrative content will take
place through the manipulation of real, 3D objects (tangible interface), also perceivable by
people with visual impairments. Each of these objects will be ﬁxed to the top surface (but
raised to be touched and perceived tactilely in their whole volume, 360◦). Where it will
not be possible to use the original objects, 3D prints or handmade replicas will be created,
with tactile translations (patterns) making understandable ﬁgures, decorative motifs, and
color variety, where necessary. Touching the tangible objects will allow them to display,
on the screen located above, the related narration in audiovisual form. The latter will be
supported by subtitles written in the same language and sign language—LIS if in Italian,
IS if in English—to facilitate access to deaf people. Each narrative unit will last about 1 min,
so as not to tire the user.
Audio will be transmitted through directional speakers, so as not to create sound
interferences in the environment that will host multiple multimedia installations and/or
not to disturb visitors who are not experiencing that speciﬁc TUI station. If some visi-
tors want to passively enjoy the content, they will have to stand next to the active user,
in the axis with the directional audio. For people with cochlear implants and/or sound
ampliﬁers, a magnetic induction ampliﬁer will be included to enhance listening and isolate
background noise.
4.1.3. Contents, Languages, and Style
The user will be guided through a journey from the original location of the marble
(which will be narrated through the tools used to excavate and shape the materials),
to the decoration of Porta Marina (where the user can interact through a puzzle game,
reconstructing the ﬁgures of the Opus Sectile), to the enigmatic personage of a bearded

Heritage 2021, 4
579
human ﬁgure with a halo (which will be proposed, in a simpliﬁed way, as a tangible
3D-printed object) to, ﬁnally, a 3D reconstruction of the building and urban settlement in
Ostia Antica.
In terms of language and style, it is necessary to capture the essential meaning of
the message to convey. It is also important to calibrate well the duration of sentences,
their logical structure, and correctly formulate the form and the expressive register of the
narrative. For this reason, the aid of accessibility experts has been crucial in this preliminary
phase of the project, and it will be necessary during the realization phase.
The duration of a video in LIS/IS is comparable to its version in spoken language. The
text in LIS is not a translation of the text in the spoken language, but it is a new text that
has its own sequential structure; therefore, according to the experts it will be convenient to
start from a text conceived in LIS and then transposed into the spoken language, rather
than the opposite [34].
The narration that works for LIS should also be effective for the blind or visually
impaired users: the audio should also help the visually impaired person to understand
what is happening on the monitor, describing the shapes, their constituent elements,
and their location in space (audio description). It will therefore be necessary to give precise
spatial references, for example: “the animal you see in the center, the ﬂower you see on the
left, etc.”. This same audio will also be useful to deaf users (in the form of LIS), providing
more descriptive information on what is being explained.
It is also necessary to specify in the text, whenever it occurs, noises and sounds as to
ensure an augmentative sensory experience and a complete understanding of the content
for deaf users. Graphics should be essential and uncrowded. Overlapping of different
elements has to be avoided (e.g., writing on photographs, etc.). For texts, the background
can be dark with light characters or vice versa. There is not a univocal solution since
there are many types of visual impairments. The images that will be placed alongside the
narrator in video need to correspond to (and be synchronized with) the story he/she is
telling; they may consist of drawings, photographs, animations, and videos. The tactile
drawings will be translated according to the rules of good tactile reading in order to create
useful aids for the recognition of images by the visually impaired users [23].
Finally, each TUI station has one or more tangible objects on the table, each of which
will determine the start of a single narrative fragment. The order of activation of the various
narrative fragments is not univocal; therefore, the narrative units will be autonomous
although related.
4.2. Holographic Showcase and Its Integration with TUIs
In the African section of the MuCIV, a holographic showcase will be set up integrated
in a larger projection wall [5]. Inside the showcase, two original objects will be exhibited,
a Baulé Male Statue and a Lega Mask. The virtual contents will be visible sometimes inside
the showcase, in the form of a hologram, and sometimes outside the showcase, expanding
themselves on the surrounding projection wall.
The internal hologram will be related to the form, to the constitutive elements of the
object, its details, and relative meanings. In the showcase, an effect of mixed reality (MR)
will thus be produced, relying on the Pepper’s ghost technique, born with photography
in the XV century, diffused in theaters in the XIX century, and today enhanced by digital
technologies [35].
External contents, projected on the surrounding wall, will be related to the context of
production and use of such objects in Africa, documented and shown through photographs
and archive footage: ceremonies, rituals, dances and music, and contexts of production of
these artifacts. These repertoires cannot be displayed in the holographic showcase, which
needs a speciﬁc visual grammar.
Indeed, a hologram is an illusion of reality [36]. Its use is not only aimed at arousing
amazing reactions in visitors, thanks to its magical effect. Through the hologram, in fact,
it is possible to create a better integration between real and virtual dimensions: if we

Heritage 2021, 4
580
include the real artifact inside the holographic showcase, the attention still remains focused
on the real artifact. Not its virtual replica, but the original one, is the center of our attention
during the experience: the virtual animations and the story fragments come out of the real
ﬁgures, creating a mixed reality experience. The holographic showcase is conceived as a
small theatrical stage equipped with controls for the direction and synchronization of each
scenic device: lights, audio speakers, scenery, projections. Everything will be managed by
ad hoc software.
The structure of the installation is designed according to the rules of the Pepper’s
ghost technique: a monitor is mounted on the top of the showcase to close its ceiling, in a
hidden position; the images transmitted by the monitor are reﬂected by a transparent mirror
positioned at 45◦(invisible to the public because of its transparency) and are projected,
by effect of an optical illusion, on a projection plane on the back, corresponding with the
position of the real objects. Elements such as (a) integration of real and digital content,
(b) structure, (c) materials, (d) interior design, (e) lighting, (f) audiovisual grammar, and (g)
narrative approach and dramatization are designed as a whole, and combine to constitute
an “expressive unity” [5]. The holographic showcase, in such a conﬁguration, has been
ﬁrstly conceived and realized by our team in occasion of the CEMEC project [5] (Connecting
Early Medieval European Collections), within the Creative Europe framework (2015–2019),
presented in several European museums during an itinerant exhibition and tested on more
than 600 visitors. A huge amount of data has been collected regarding its attractiveness,
educational impact, usability, and sustainability. The IntARSI project has been the occasion
to evolve this format to embrace UD criteria, most probably for the ﬁrst time, without
renouncing its magic.
The selection of contents and the interaction is done through TUI on a table/surface
placed frontally, leaning on the showcase. Most probably this is the ﬁrst example of a
holographic showcase which takes care of UD criteria. On the table, two replicas of the
objects are positioned at the extremities, and can be touched by visitors in order to be
perceived and better identiﬁed (especially by blind visitors). Between them there are
four buttons for language selection (Italian, English, LIS, and IS). In this case, LIS or IS
versions are not automatically integrated with the spoken languages, but must be activated
intentionally if needed, because the ﬁgure of the translator in video could interfere a little
bit with the magic of the hologram that comes (also) from the graphic essentiality. On
the bottom of the table, some A5 panels are printed with normal fonts and overlapping
Braille: they indicate the function of the buttons above, and the captions of the two replicas
(Figure 4).
The installation will be equipped with a lateral pocket containing Braille text and tactile
drawings, dealing with the main contents of the narrative. These auxiliary supports will be
in A3 format. Panels, interfaces, audio systems will be similar to the ones implemented for
the other TUIs.
Heritage 2021, 4 FOR PEER REVIEW  
15 
 
bility. The IntARSi project has been the occasion to evolve this format to embrace UD 
criteria, most probably for the first time, without renouncing its magic. 
The selection of contents and the interaction is done through TUI on a table/surface 
placed frontally, leaning on the showcase. Most probably this is the first example of a 
holographic showcase which takes care of UD criteria. On the table, two replicas of the 
objects are positioned at the extremities, and can be touched by visitors in order to be 
perceived and better identified (especially by blind visitors). Between them there are 
four buttons for language selection (Italian, English, LIS, and IS). In this case, LIS or IS 
versions are not automatically integrated with the spoken languages, but must be acti-
vated intentionally if needed, because the figure of the translator in video could interfere 
a little bit with the magic of the hologram that comes (also) from the graphic essentiality. 
On the bottom of the table, some A5 panels are printed with normal fonts and overlap-
ping Braille: they indicate the function of the buttons above, and the captions of the two 
replicas (Figure 4). 
The installation will be equipped with a lateral pocket containing Braille text and 
tactile drawings, dealing with the main contents of the narrative. These auxiliary sup-
ports will be in A3 format. Panels, interfaces, audio systems will be similar to the ones 
implemented for the other TUIs. 
 
Figure 4. Holographic showcase with TUIs. On the left: rendering showing the main components 
of the interface. On the right: frontal axonometric projection with measures. In collaboration with 
Enzo d’Annibale, CNR ISPC. 
4.3. Holographic Theatre and Its Integration with Gesture-Based Interaction 
In the rooms dedicated to the Figure Theater of the MuCIV and in the Museum of 
Toys in Zagarolo, demo-ethno-anthropological assets will be brought back to life, in 
their intangible value, as evidence of customs and cultural traditions. Through the crea-
tion of a holographic theater, some marionettes (that are physically exhibited in the sur-
rounding showcases) will be virtually animated. Again, the holographic theater will be 
based on the technique of Pepper’s ghost (Figure 5) VHLab has a long-standing experi-
Figure 4. Holographic showcase with TUIs. On the left: rendering showing the main components of
the interface. On the right: frontal axonometric projection with measures. In collaboration with Enzo
d’Annibale, CNR ISPC.

Heritage 2021, 4
581
4.3. Holographic Theatre and Its Integration with Gesture-Based Interaction
In the rooms dedicated to the Figure Theater of the MuCIV and in the Museum of
Toys in Zagarolo, demo-ethno-anthropological assets will be brought back to life, in their
intangible value, as evidence of customs and cultural traditions. Through the creation of a
holographic theater, some marionettes (that are physically exhibited in the surrounding
showcases) will be virtually animated. Again, the holographic theater will be based on the
technique of Pepper’s ghost (Figure 5). VHLab has a long-standing experience (since 2011)
with natural (mid-air gesture based) interaction applied to virtual reality environments.
This modality of interaction is not mediated by traditional devices like a mouse, joystick,
etc., resulting indeed clearer for everyone. The experience is conﬁgured as a progression of
physical as well as cognitive actions. Numerous surveys have been carried out to evaluate
the user experience related to such VR applications [37–39]. Hundreds of visitors were
observed and interviewed in the different venues, taking into account both active and
passive users. What has been found is that interacting with a VR application through
body gestures, in the center of a “performative” space, immediately generates in the visitor
the impression of being involved in a playful situation, unusual inside a museum, and it
encourages socialization and alternation between active and passive roles. Therefore, the
experience is done with enthusiasm, like a game, in most of the cases. This is particularly
evident for those visitors under 20 and over 60, while the intermediate age group shows
a greater self-control that can lead to shyness and any other social and psychomotor
inhibition [6].
3D digital replicas of some puppets will be realized, visualized inside the holographic
theater and contextualized in a virtual scenography. At the beginning of the show they will
explain to the public their history, their typical gestures and expressions, and their origin,
character, and context of use; after a while, they will become “movable” thanks to visitors’
gestures, and a game will start, as a single user or in a team. The gestures and the mime
of the virtual marionette can be performed by visitors through gesture-based interaction
interfaces, made possible by sensors for full-body motion capture, like Kinect or a similar
device. While the marionette will tell a typical story, vocally interpreting its role, the user
will move in front of it, giving expression to its body and completing the performance.
Thus, the visitor will play the role of puppeteer, as his/her movements are transferred to
the virtual marionettes, but the visitor himself/herself will become a marionette in front of
a mirror.
Heritage 2021, 4 FOR PEER REVIEW  
16 
 
application through body gestures, in the center of a “performative” space, immediately 
generates in the visitor the impression of being involved in a playful situation, unusual 
inside a museum, and it encourages socialization and alternation between active and 
passive roles. Therefore, the experience is done with enthusiasm, like a game, in most of 
the cases. This is particularly evident for those visitors under 20 and over 60, while the 
intermediate age group shows a greater self-control that can lead to shyness and any 
other social and psychomotor inhibition [6]. 
3D digital replicas of some puppets will be realized, visualized inside the holo-
graphic theater and contextualized in a virtual scenography. At the beginning of the 
show they will explain to the public their history, their typical gestures and expressions, 
and their origin, character, and context of use; after a while, they will become “movable” 
thanks to visitors’ gestures, and a game will start, as a single user or in a team. The ges-
tures and the mime of the virtual marionette can be performed by visitors through ges-
ture-based interaction interfaces, made possible by sensors for full-body motion capture, 
like Kinect or a similar device. While the marionette will tell a typical story, vocally in-
terpreting its role, the user will move in front of it, giving expression to its body and 
completing the performance. Thus, the visitor will play the role of puppeteer, as his/her 
movements are transferred to the virtual marionettes, but the visitor himself/herself will 
become a marionette in front of a mirror. 
The game can be played in a team, with players moving other puppets or selecting, 
through a peripheral device, proper digital scenographies to be visualized, as back-
ground, in the holographic showcase. The player/team who best interprets the character 
and context of the puppets will be the winner of the game. 
 
Figure 5. Setup of the holographic theatre and interactive area. In collaboration with Enzo d’Annibale, CNR ISPC. 
5. Conclusions 
Improving the physical and virtual worlds for people with specific needs in terms 
of physical, cognitive, and emotional abilities, allows the museum experience to live in a 
more intense and profitable way. Especially for art and culture, technology can change 
the way people communicate and interact within museum spaces, translating the acces-
sibility concept into concrete actions to make the environment truly smart [40]. 
Within the IntARSi project we carried out the first, essential step toward a wider 
strategy for museums’ valorization based on the concepts of user-centered approach, 
multisensory and multichannel communication, accessibility, tailored interfaces and 
Figure 5. Setup of the holographic theatre and interactive area. In collaboration with Enzo d’Annibale,
CNR ISPC.
The game can be played in a team, with players moving other puppets or selecting,
through a peripheral device, proper digital scenographies to be visualized, as background,
in the holographic showcase. The player/team who best interprets the character and
context of the puppets will be the winner of the game.

Heritage 2021, 4
582
5. Conclusions
Improving the physical and virtual worlds for people with speciﬁc needs in terms
of physical, cognitive, and emotional abilities, allows the museum experience to live in a
more intense and proﬁtable way. Especially for art and culture, technology can change the
way people communicate and interact within museum spaces, translating the accessibility
concept into concrete actions to make the environment truly smart [40].
Within the IntARSI project we carried out the ﬁrst, essential step toward a wider
strategy for museums’ valorization based on the concepts of user-centered approach,
multisensory and multichannel communication, accessibility, tailored interfaces and tools,
multicultural inclusion, storytelling, emotional solicitation, and technological innovation.
Beyond European guidelines and national rules for accessibility of ICT products, an
extended application of these criteria in common museums is very rare. Interventions
in favor of multimedia accessibility are often circumscribed to speciﬁc actions: museums
entirely dedicated to blind people; guided tours in sign language managed by physical
professionals; applications created in research laboratories and temporarily tested in cul-
tural venues; tactile paths for blind users, often limited to the possibility of touching copies
of the original objects, with little possibility of deepening. These are important and praise-
worthy initiatives, but they are not always effective examples of inclusive experiences
for all the people. The current contribution tries to establish coherent, proﬁtable, and
feasible solutions for a permanent and inclusive museum fruition, without renouncing to
the technological boost, while allowing playful dynamics, attractive solutions usable by all
the public, adopting multichannel communication strategies.
Our partners were MuCIV (Rome), Ostia Antica Archaeological Park (Ostia), and the
Museum of Toys (Zagarolo). All of them are in the Lazio region (Italy) which funded this
initiative. MuCIV was interested in embracing new cultural, ethical, and social issues,
retaining speciﬁc targets, like experts, foreign communities (also of immigrants), and im-
paired persons. Thus, we tried to open our previous and long experience in the ﬁeld of
virtual heritage and museums to the UD issues, involving accessibility experts and com-
munication scientists. In the following phase of the project, we intend to involve African
communities living in Rome for the creation of multimedia contents to be implemented in
the TUIs about contemporary Africa, where some representative objects of their culture
will be surely integrated.
In the context of IntARSI, we learned how to adapt previously developed solutions
(e.g., the holographic showcase realized in the context of the recent European CEMEC
project) to make them accessible to impaired persons, introducing tactile interaction and
sign language, even in those situations where this seemed unsuitable. Single user or
multiplayer installations, interactive or passive, and dynamic or contemplative experiences
have been designed, dealing with topics representing popular or aristocratic, ancient and
contemporary cultures and regional, national, or international contexts [41–44].
The innovative value of the current contribution stands in the whole design process
that required cooperation and know-how transferring among experts coming from different
research ﬁelds: museums designers, digital curators, storytellers, technicians, engineers,
interface and user experience designers, acoustics engineers, and experts of visual and
hearing disabilities, including external communities, allowing a co-creation process to
take place. This encounter is not common in Italian and foreign museums, despite the
guidelines, rules, and recommendations in terms of ICT accessibility and social inclusion
introduced by Europe and adopted by national laws. Typically, museums had been poorly
funded for renovation, digitization, maintenance, and marketing. Restrictions on budgets
and monuments’ preservation had often led to partial and incomplete solutions for few
or limited application areas. However, there have been some excellent cases of Italian
museums dedicated to speciﬁc disabilities that were a basis for identifying appropriate
technical speciﬁcations, as mentioned in Section 2.2.
The IntARSI project wants to integrate several aspects of communication: attractive-
ness, accessibility, usability, educational impact, emotional and multisensory engagement,

Heritage 2021, 4
583
storytelling, and gaming strategies in a uniﬁed vision. We hope that the work conducted
within this project can be seen as a ﬁrst milestone for integrating a wide range of actions
that can improve the accessibility for larger user groups, according to a more comprehen-
sive and unitary perspective for the museum development and management. A wider
strategy for museums, in general, is needed: for instance, the presence of a staff, speciﬁcally
trained and dedicated to welcome and support impaired persons, mediating their approach
with the environment and the technologies; training or recruiting staff who can speak sign
language; and staff who are themselves disabled would be important next steps. An access
audit should include a review of all communication issues and marketing, for example,
ensuring that images of the museum on posters and on the website include images of
disabled visitors.
In conclusion, we are conﬁdent that the next steps of this process (and project) can be
based on deep cultural interactions between real and virtual environments, museum staff,
and visitors’ participation.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.P.; methodology, E.P., A.P., G.F.; validation, E.P.; formal
analysis, E.P. and A.P.; investigation, E.P., A.P., L.B. G.F.; resources, E.P., A.P.; data curation, E.P., A.P.,
G.F.; writing—original draft preparation, E.P., A.P., L.B., G.F.; writing—review and editing, E.P., A.P.,
G.F., L.B.; supervision, E.P.; project administration, E.P.; funding acquisition, E.P. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by MuCIV, CUP: F34E19000070003. Agreement MuCIV-CNR
ISPC prot. N. 0000566 del 20/09/2019.
Data Availability Statement: Data supporting reported results can be found in the Technical Dossier
of the IntARSI Multimedia project developed by CNR ISPC (ex ITABC) delivered to MuCIV, including
links to archived datasets generated during the study (prot. N. 1489/2020).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the MuCIV, in particular the Filippo Maria
Gambari, Francesca Manuela Anzelmo, Ilenia Bove, Gaia Del Pino; the Archaeological Park of Ostia
Antica, in particular Clauda Tempesta and Alberto Tulli; the experts in accessibility Cristiana Carlini
(Museo Omero) and Carlo Di Biase for their precious support; Michele Fucci for helping us with the
technological system integration; the colleagues of CNR ISPC-Virtual Heritage Lab who collaborated
in the design of technologies and in the archaeological research; our colleague Nicolò Paraciani who
supported us in the topic of accessibility; ﬁnally, Lazio Innova who ﬁnanced the project.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Council of Europe (CoE). Council of Europe (CoE). Council of Europe Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural Heritage
for Society. In Faro Declaration of the Council of Europe’s Strategy for Developing Intercultural Dialogue; Council of Europe: Strasbourg,
France, 2005.
2.
Falk, J.H. Identity and the Museum Visitor Experience; Left Coast Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2009.
3.
Falk, J.H.; Dierking, L.D. The Museum Experience Revisited; Routledge: London, UK, 2012.
4.
Pietroni, E. Experience Design, Virtual Reality and Media Hybridization for the Digital Communication Inside Museums. Appl.
Syst. Innov. 2019, 2, 35. [CrossRef]
5.
Pietroni, E.; Ferdani, D.; Forlani, M.; Pagano, A.; Rufa, C. Bringing the illusion of reality inside museums—A methodological
proposal for an advanced museology using holographic showcases. Informatics 2019, 6, 2. [CrossRef]
6.
Pietroni, E.; Pagano, A.; Poli, C. Tiber Valley Virtual Museum: User Experience Evaluation in the National Etruscan Museum of
Villa Giulia. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference in Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and
Computer Vision WSCG 2016, Plzen, Czech Republic, 30 May–3 June 2016; Skala, V., Pan, Z., Eds.; UNION Agency: Plzen, Czech
Republic, 2016; pp. 97–106, ISSN 2464–4625 (CD-ROM)ISSN 2464–4617 (print).
7.
Bateson, G. Steps to an Ecology of Mind; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1972.
8.
Forte, M. About Virtual Archaeology: Disorders, Cognitive Interactions and Virtuality. In Virtual Reality in Archaeology; Barceló,
J.A., Forte, M., Sanders, D.H., Eds.; British Archaeological Reports; Archeopress: Oxford, UK, 2000.
9.
ISO 9241-11:2018. Ergonomics of Human-System Interaction—Part 11: Usability: Deﬁnitions and Concepts. Available online:
https://www.iso.org/standard/63500.html (accessed on 3 April 2021).
10.
Pescarin, S. Video Games, Ricerca. In Patrimonio Culturale; Franco Angeli Editore: Milano, Italy, 2020; ISBN-13: 9788835103004.
11.
Mellet-d’Huart, D. A model of (en)action to approach embodiment: A cornerstone for the design of virtual environments for
learning. Virtual Real. 2006, 10, 253–269. [CrossRef]

Heritage 2021, 4
584
12.
Wagner, R.W. Edgar Dale: Professional. Theory Pr. 1970, 9, 89–95. [CrossRef]
13.
Betsy, J.; Case, P.H.D. Universal Design, Policy Report, June 2003, by Pearson Education, Inc. or Its Afﬁliate(s). Available online:
http://images.pearsonassessments.com/images/tmrs/tmrs_rg/UniversalDesign.pdf (accessed on 27 December 2020).
14.
Accessibility Requirements for ICT Products and Services. EN 301549. Available online: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/
301500_301599/301549/02.01.02_60/en_301549v020102p.pdf (accessed on 3 April 2021).
15.
ISO/IEC 17007:2009. 2018-Conformity Assessment—Guidance for Drafting Normative Documents Suitable for Use for Confor-
mity Assessment. Available online: https://www.iso.org/standard/42635.html (accessed on 3 April 2021).
16.
Baykal, G.E.; Veryeri Alaca, I.; Yantaç, A.E.; Göksun, T. A Review on Complementary Natures of Tangible User Interfaces (TUIs)
and Early Spatial Learning. Int. J. Child-Comput. Interact. 2018, 16, 104–113. [CrossRef]
17.
Billinghurst, M.; Grasset, R.; Seichter, H. Chapter 11—Tangible Interfaces for Ambient Augmented Reality Applications. In
Human-Centric Interfaces for Ambient Intelligence; Aghajan, H., Delgado, L.C., Augusto, J.C., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA.,
USA, 2010; pp. 281–302. ISBN 9780123747082. [CrossRef]
18.
Grassini, A. Toccare la Bellezza—Catalogo Mostra; Corraini: Mantova, Italy, 2020; pp. 11–17.
19.
Macdonald, S. Interconnecting: Museum visiting and exhibition design. CoDesign 2007, 3, 149–162. [CrossRef]
20.
Bedford, L. The Art of Museum Exhibitions: How Story and Imagination Create Aesthetic Experiences; Left Coast Press: Walnut Creek,
CA, USA, 2014.
21.
Bogle, E. Museum Exhibition Planning and Design; AltaMira Press: Landham, MA, USA, 2013.
22.
Decker, J. (Ed.) Technology and Digital Initiatives: Innovative Approaches for Museums; Innovative Approaches for Museums; Rowman
& Littleﬁeld Publishers: Lanham, MD, USA, 2015.
23.
AA.VV. A cura di Museo Tattile Statale Omero. L’arte a portata di mano. Verso una pedagogia di accesso ai Beni culturali senza
barriere. In Proceedings of the Atti del Convegno, Armando, Roma, Italy, 21–23 October 2004.
24.
Grassini, A. I ciechi e le arti plastiche. In Le dispense del Museo Omero; Museo Omero: Ancona, Italy, 2004.
25.
Hassenzahl, M. The thing and I: Understanding the Relationship between User and Product. In Funology; Blythe, M.A., Overbeeke,
K., Monk, A.F., Wright, P.C., Eds.; Human-Computer Interaction Series; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherland, 2003; Volume 3,
pp. 31–42.
26.
Veneziani, M. Experientia. Lessico Intellettuale Europeo. In Proceedings of the X Colloquio Internazionale, Roma, Italy, 4–6
January 2001; Olschki: Firenze, Italy, 2002. ISBN 9788822251435.
27.
DuFour, R.; DuFour, R.; Eaker, R.W.; Many, T.; Mattos, M. Learning by Doing: A Handbook for Professional Learning Communities at
Work, 3rd ed.; Solution Tree: Bloomington, IN, USA, 2016.
28.
Moon, J.A. A Handbook of Reﬂective and Experiential Learning: Theory and Practice New York; Routledge: London, UK, 2004.
29.
Dewey, J. Experience & Education; Kappa Delta Pi: New York, NY, USA, 1938.
30.
Kolb, D. Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development; Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, 1984.
31.
Baraldi, S.; Bimbo, A.D.; Landucci, L.; Torpei, N. Natural Interaction. In Encyclopedia of Database Systems; Liu, L., Özsu, M.T., Eds.;
Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2009. [CrossRef]
32.
Arena, M.S. l’Opus Sectile di Porta Marina; Soprintendenza per i Beni Archeologici di Ostia: Roma, Italy, 2005.
33.
Caselli, M.C.; Maragna, S.; Volterra, V. Linguaggio e Sordità; Il Mulino: Bologna, Italy, 2006; pp. 38–40.
34.
Di Biase, C. Accessibilità e Lingua dei segni. In Quaderni della valorizzazione. Nuova Serie 4—Edited by Direzione Generale Musei;
MiBACT: Rome, Italy, 2017.
35.
Porta, J.B. Natural Magick; NuVision Publications: Canton, MA, USA, 2003; ISBN 9781595472380.
36.
Dawson, P. The Visual Language of Holograms. In Advanced Holography-Metrology and Imaging; Naydenova, I., Ed.; IntechOpen
Limited: London, UK, 2011; ISBN 978-953-307-729-1.
37.
Carvalho, D.; Bessa, M.; Magalhães, L.; Carrapatoso, E. Performance evaluation of gesture-based interaction between different
age groups using Fitts’ Law. In Proceedings of the XVI International Conference on Human Computer Interaction (Interacción ‘15);
Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2015; Article 5; pp. 1–7. [CrossRef]
38.
Carvalho, D.; Bessa, M.; Magalhães, L. Different interaction paradigms for different user groups: An evaluation regarding content
selection. In Proceedings of the XV International Conference on Human Computer Interaction—Interaccion’14, Puerto de la Cruz,
Tenerife, Spain, 10–12 September 2014; p. 40.
39.
Khalaf, A.S.; Alharthi, S.A.; Dolgov, I.; Toups, Z.O. A Comparative Study of Hand Gesture Recognition Devices in the Context of
Game Design. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces, Daejeon, Korea,
10–13 November 2019; pp. 397–402.
40.
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Available online: https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/
convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html (accessed on 3 April 2021).
41.
Davidson, L.; Pérez Castellanos, L. Cosmopolitan Ambassadors: International Exhibitions, Cultural Diplomacy and the Polycentral
Museum; Vernon Press: Wilmington, DE, USA, 2018.
42.
Pitman, B.; Hirzy, E. Ignite the Power of Art: Advancing Visitor Engagement in Museums; Yale University Press: New Haven, CT,
USA, 2011.
43.
Roppola, T. Designing for the Museum Visitor Experience; Routledge: London, UK, 2014.
44.
Simon, N. The Art of Relevance; Wordpress: Santa Cruz, CA, USA, 2016.

