See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/337010813
Museum Accessibility through Technology. The MUSACCES Project
Experience
Chapter · November 2019
CITATION
1
READS
528
3 authors:
Covadonga Rodrigo
National Distance Education University
91 PUBLICATIONS   575 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Ana M Garcia-Serrano
National Distance Education University
169 PUBLICATIONS   1,114 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Ángeles Sánchez-Elvira Paniagua
National Distance Education University
123 PUBLICATIONS   771 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Ana M Garcia-Serrano on 04 November 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

 
MUSEUM ACCESSIBILITY THROUGH TECHNOLOGY. THE MUSACCES PROJECT 
EXPERIENCE  
 
 
Covadonga Rodrigo 
UNED – Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, Spain 
covadonga@lsi.uned.es 
Ana García-Serrano 
UNED – Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, Spain 
agarcia@lsi.uned.es 
Ángeles Sánchez-Elvira Paniagua 
UNED – Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, Spain 
asanchez-elvira@psi.uned.es 
 
Abstract 
People with disabilities still face the problem of limitations while accessing to and enjoying artistic heritage. 
The work developed within the MUSACCES project aims to improve the relation of people with disabilities with 
the artistic heritage in the Prado museum trying to achieve a multisensorial user experience discovering 
formative narratives around the artistic elements. The main characters of the paintings act as virtual 
conductors of the user-experience through the learning artistic itinerary with augmented reality features. For 
the historians, an automated system has been developed to manage predefined objects, such as the characters 
(both real and fictitious), plot events, museum works (and their associated metadata) or external references 
allowing the construction of semantic graphs, with which the artistic narratives will be constructed. The 
application of a Technology Acceptance Model survey extended with accessibility criteria focused on collecting 
the interests of potential users with disabilities and determining the ease of use and the perception of utility 
of the technology to be used.  
 
Keywords: multisensorial design, user experience, Technology Acceptance Model, mobile application, 
narratology, cultural heritage.  
 
1. Museology and Social Integration 
The purpose of the United Nations Convention on the rights of Persons with Disabilities (UN, 2006) is to 
promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by 
all persons with disabilities. In Spain, the Law of Equality of Opportunity, Non-Discrimination and Universal 
Accessibility (LIONDAU, 2003) upholds the principles of normalisation and independent life. As a result, Spanish 
society is becoming more and more aware that the inclusion of persons with disability (9% of the overall 
national population) in the different areas of social life is compulsory. The application of the universal rights to 
the enjoyment of cultural and artistic heritage is helping people to consider the question of accessibility as a 
very relevant aspect for the revitalization of the monuments, for instance. Artistic heritage, being accessible 
to all people regardless of their disabilities, is long lasting and strengthen its nature to all of society. The 
Ministry of Culture along with the Ministry of Health, Social Politic and Equality have launched several 
initiatives regarding spanish Strategies for Culture for for All, aiming to promote and normalise the 

 
implementation of accessibility in all initiatives in the cultural context, assurig the compliance with the highest 
demands for quality, technology and adaptability (Real Patronato Discapacidad, 2011). 
 
Stressing the need for a human rights-based approach to cultural heritage matters, the great challenge of 
Museology of the XXI Century is the attention and integration of the most disadvantaged social sectors with 
museums. Modern museology, without abandoning the fundaments of the custody, study, research, exhibition 
and contemplation of collections of artistic, historical, scientific, or technical value or of any other nature, has 
made it a greater and more varied dynamic reality to the service to the public. The museum institutions are 
living spaces whose managers try to bring about a more dynamic and open participation. The interest in 
educating and socialising culture has endowed the museums with human resources, etc., and diverse 
strategies for attracting the public.  
2. The MUSACCES Consortium 
The MUSACCES - S2015/HUM-3494 project1 began its progress in 2016 with the consolidation of a Consortium 
which operates in the Comunidad de Madrid and which proposes museology activity and social integration in 
an environment of interdisciplinary work, seeking to bring the Museo del Prado to collectives which face 
special accessibility barriers (such as blind, deaf and imprisoned people) supported by Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICTs). The research work is being developed by participants from 
multidisciplinary fields, humanists and technologists, from research groups from the Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, the Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia (UNED) and the Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid (UAM), with the collaboration of the Museo del Prado and other businesses and institutions such as 
Fundacion Vodafone España and Fundación ONCE.  
The INADOC (Innovative User INteraction to Accessible Digital Objects and Collections) group of UNED is a 
recently created multidisciplinary group made up of teacher-researchers, experts in models for accessibility 
and usability, and technologies for the management of large repositories of information, the automatic 
processing of natural language and access to multimedia information, and experts in designing and follow up 
of the use of new technologies in education and measuring its quality. Within the Consortium, the user-
experience has been designed with a multi-sensorial approach making all senses to be active and aware of the 
different activities proposed by a mobile app. The work developed by the INADOC group labour is centred on 
enhancing the artistic itineraries through technologies assuring the maximum level of accessibility following 
the Design For All principles of the artifacts and the Universal Design for Learning approach for the formative 
itineraries (CAST, 2018).  
3. Lines of integration as regards accessibility to artistic heritage 
The MUSACCES Consortium decided to develop user-experiences based on the sense of sight, smell, touch, 
taste and hearing through various artistic interpretations (Rodrigo et al., 2017). The lines of accessibility are 
different for people with visual impairment as those with hearing impairment. 
Those people who are unable to perceive images through sight have serious difficulties in enjoying the visual 
artistic experience. In some cases, when blindness set in after several years of normal life, the minds of these 
people are able to reconstruct what they perceive from past images. However, many blind people where born 
                                                           
1 http://www.musacces.es 

 
blind, therefore they lack the prior visual references on which to build their mental images. Visual perception 
may be substituted with an active participation of the artistic experience through touch senses (touching 
volumetric representations of works of art and reading texts written in Braille), through hearing (listening to 
musical passages of melodies and sounds of musical instruments), through taste (experiencing flavours related 
to the pictorial works) and through smell (smelling aromas that evoke that which is embodied in the pictures). 
This facts have been tested in MUSACCES through a specific Workshops entitled “The Museo del Prado through 
the 5 senses” that have been carried out through 2016 and 2018. Experiencing the works of art through the 
other senses different from sight allows the blind people to enjoy aesthetical experiences equivalent to those 
of sighted people and will facilitate them access to artistic heritage from an integrated museology. 
Those people who are unable to hear sounds clearly have difficulties in suitably receiving acoustic explanations 
on the artistic works in a museum, even though they have no difficulty in seeing them. Although they have no 
accessibility problems in the direct contemplation of the pictorial works or sculptures, this collective is able to 
take advantage of didactic resources without sound to help them appreciate the relevance of the said works 
in its cultural environment in greater detail. The Consortium tries to improve the experience of this potential 
visitor through the use of audio guides as an element to help them during the visit, and creating other types 
of interactive supports that will accompany the deaf people during their tours of the Museo del Prado. 
4. Compilation and analysis of the interests and needs of users with disabilities 
The MUSACCES project started with the compilation of the interests and needs of the collectives of people 
with  disabilities as regards the artistic heritage of the Museo del Prado. The survey inluded several questions 
in accordance with the TAM (Technology Acceptance Model) model (Davis, 1993) and (Davis, et al. 1989) used 
to predict the benefits of the usage of ICTs. The model is based on two main characteristics: 
a) 
The Perceived Usefulness, PU, refers to the degree to which a person believes, that by using a 
technological system in particular, his/her performance will improve. 
b) 
The Perceived Ease of Use, PEOU, highlights up to which degree a person believes, that by using a 
technological system in particular, he/she will make less effort to carry out his/her tasks. 
In MUSACCES, the survey was developed to analyze the perceptions of people with disabilities regarding the 
use of certain ICTs usually integrated into mobile devices that could be of use for the design and development 
of accessible and interactive mobile learning itineraries inside and outside the Prado Museum. The qualitative 
study was carried out by collecting data through an ad-hoc questionnaire, validated by a team of experts 
(psychologists and sociologists). The population under study was composed by 6,571 students with disabilities 
enrolled at the university. The survey was delivered by a LimeSurvey instance with a high degree of accessibility 
and data analysis conducted with IBM SPSS software. The survey was organized into three different sections: 
1) cultural and artistic personal interests, 2) socio-economic user profiling and 3) the ease of use, efficiency 
and utility of the selected technologies according to TAM. 
278 valid answers were studied, 55.8% delivered by women and 44.2% by men, with a mean age of 44 years, 
with 34,5% reached the level of university degree or equivalent. Regarding disability, 26.3% have a recognized 
disability degree over 65%, while 65.1% dealt between 33% and 65% suffering dfferent illnesses and functional 
problems, Only 36.6% of them reported to use some kind of adaptation or assistive technology to access ICTs 
daily. The preliminary analysis of the survey (Rodrigo et al., 2017) results show the following characteristics 
according to the following factors: 

 
• Factor 1. Generalization in the use of mobile devices in the group of people with disabilities. 92.1% of the 
respondents confirm using a smartphone, or last generation mobile devices and half of them, 51.1%, also use 
tablets to connect daily to the Internet (60.4% of cases) or with certain frequency (29.1%). Data also confirm 
that mobile devices are very efficient for daily tasks (92.8% smartphones, 74.8% tablets). These data refuted 
other studies carried out in the country such as Fundación Vodafone España (2016). 
• Factor 2. Implications of ICT for ease of connectivity and the formation of user communities. A large 
percentage of the users confirm that mobile devices are easy (51.8% smartphones, 45.3% tablets) or very easy 
(36% smartphones, 29.9% tablets) to use, being the phones more easy to use than tablets. As for the Bluetooth 
technology, this is the easiest to use according to 60.8% of the sample, the NFC technology according to 25.5%. 
Some specific technologies, for instance audio induction loop for hearing impaired people reached only 9.8%.  
• Factor 3. Attitude towards the use of multimedia and audiovisual materials for explanatory accompaniment 
in the museum. The perception of the usefulness of audio-guides and video-guides (45.3%, 34.5%) was greater 
than their ease of use (43.5%, 29.2%). People think audio-guides were most affordable, also being its use more 
widespread.  
• Factor 4. Attitude towards the inclusion through ICT of gamification activities and augmented reality features. 
19.8% of the sample consider that the augmented reality is easy to handle, however its use is very scarce (70% 
said they have never used a mobile app with this technology implemented). It is relevant to point out that 
people who are used to use assistive technologies in their daily activities, give more value to this technology 
and find it easier to use. 
• Factor 5. Attitude of people with disabilities towards virtual tours. Approximately 75% of respondents have 
never visited a museum virtually, although there is a high percentage of visits to the museums' websites and 
their collections. For instance, 56.9% have already visited the Prado Museum website. Interestingly, people 
with hearing impairment are less interested in this type of visit (usually lacking subtitling or easy reading 
styling) than people with visual impairment, who access content more easily through screen readers. 
5. Achieving OpenLinkedData and Artistic Narratives 
The description of virtual tours or stories in museums is also an area of research and development within 
MUSACCE project. In relation to the artistic learning itineraries and narratives, a critical aspect in Digital 
Humanities applications is the existance of corpus and data in a proper digital format. In fact, there are specific 
projects dedicated to obtaining information and cultural data in digital format, related to the complex 
processes of digitization, structuring and visualization of information on the Web (García-Serrano et al., 2015). 
At the same time, in recent years the information on the Web is being organized according to the paradigm of 
Linked Open Data (LOD), to facilitate its reuse by computer applications that support its access by different 
users and enriching their content through multilingualism and so on. The first task to be addressed with open 
data is to know the structure of the metadata with which the data are described. Metadata is a term coined in 
the 1960s to describe the characteristics of data (data about data) and enable its retrieval and interoperability. 
To avoid ambiguity in the description of the data, experts use standard or defined description models, such as 
the CIDOC-CRM (Contextual Reference Model) defined by (Doerr et al. 2007) together with the standard FRBR 
to model the bibliographic records of the museum. 

 
The model of the Prado Museum2 is organized, at its highest level, around objects of knowledge such as: 
artwork, author, exhibition, chronological event, activity, restoration, multimedia resources and others (figure 
1). In addition to this model the museum has information on the Web in the form of microdata in JSON-LD 
format from (W3C, 2014). With the microdata, the metadata of the data contained in a web page (topics, 
attributes, etc.) is normalized to be searches by automated engines and other applications. Once the open 
data structure is known, an automatic process called a crawler can be performed, allowing the data to be 
imported into a repository or to a reusable software application, such as Paths European project3 to facilitate 
access to Europeana repository materials. 
 
Figure 1. Metadata - HTML code from view-source:https://www.museodelprado.es/coleccion/obra-de-arte/las-meninas/9fdc7800-
9ade-48b0-ab8b-edee94ea877f 
From this first stage, Mussaces repository containing the corpus extracted was locally stored to be used in 
different information retrieval tasks (IRT). This is the beginning of any IRT as for example in mixing information 
extracted from images and its annotations (Benavent et al., 2010), topic detection in a twitter corpus (Cigarrán 
et al. 2016) or semantic similarity measures to compare words meaning semantically (Lastra et al., 2017). 
Describing virtual tours or stories in museums is an area of research and development that has been working 
for some time with the objective of bringing the works of museums to the public in general  (García-Serrano & 
Castellanos, 2016). Narratology refers both to the study of the narrative and the structure of the same, as to 
the way in which it affects our perception. Related to the narratives, special mention is the DECIPHER project4 
that developed the Curate ontology (Mulholland et al., 2012), to describe histories from museums resources 
and related events (cause and effect). On this ontology two software tools were developed: Storyspace5, for 
the conservation staff of works of two museums and Storyscope6, which includes a model, its associated 
methodology and a software tool to create and publish stories about cultural heritage and museum collections. 
In MUSACCES, although the basic concepts are defined quite similarly to the model that underlies these 
narrative tools (Koenitz, 2013), they are implemented in a different way and the narrative model is more 
ambitious, based on a relationship graph. The set of all events ordered chronologically constitutes a story. 
Selecting a subset of events, without chronological ordering, creates a frame. The form of presentation 
(textual, image, sign language, audio, etc.) is the mechanism used to link the elements in such a way that is 
accessible and understandable for the general public or with special needs. Once a frame and a shape are 
selected, a narrative can be constructed. Therefore, narrative is in MUSACCES the process of giving meaning 
to the elements (that are originally independent) of the plot through the selected form. Structured open linked 
data is set along with new information to finally construct a story in which one could describe who the 
characters are and how they participate. 
                                                           
2 https://www.museodelprado.es/pmartwork 
3 http: //www.paths-project.eu/ 
4 http://kmi.open.ac.uk/projects/name/decipher 
5 http://www.eastgate.com/storyspace/ 
6 http://labs.europeana.eu/apps/Storyscope 

 
Authors have defined a first approximation to the problem and a prototype that incorporates the automatic 
ingestion of the open linked data of the Museum of the Prado with participation of the expert historians and 
educators, with the aim of facilitating the development of adaptive virtual itineraries and narratives. A first 
approach has been implemented (García-Serrano et al., 2017), called MPOC tool7, which is a web information 
system developed in the framework Laravel 5.4 and HTML5. It already defines a series of concepts that will 
serve as a structure for the construction of a semantic graph of metadata and concepts through the narratives. 
Currently, the system allows to manage predefined objects, such as the characters (both real and fictitious), 
plot events, museum works (and their associated metadata) or external references (such as Youtube, press, 
etc.). The relationships generated through the metadata or indirectly, allow the construction of semantic 
graphs with which the narratives will be constructed.  
6. Mobile application with augmented reality and 3D figures 
Another objective of MUSACCES project is producing accessible mobile apps that will serve as didactic 
itineraries for experiencing artistic work using augmented reality artifacts and gamification activities. Along 
the itinerary, the application guides the user through the content of the artistic work using an inquiry-based 
design, and some multisensorial user-experience, such as smelling, listening and touching activities. The mobile 
app has been developed using Unity 8, a very popular framework to develop apps on the Android platform. 
Unity is a very powerful engine, general purpose 3D motor, Unity free allows you to publish on the most mobile 
popular platforms. It also allows a multi-platform development (for PC, web and mobile devices) that can be 
integrated with Vuforia library for augmented reality features. Some graphical designs have been developed 
for making the main characters “alive” from the artistic paintings. As for the sound, ambient music has been 
included contextualized with the time of the artistic work and alternative voices have been also recorded for 
the main virtual characters. 
The artistic formative itinerary around the work “La Anunciación” (Fra Angelico) has been developed as a 
mobile app that follows the European guidelines for accessible developments (CEN EN 301549, 2015). The 
interaction starts focusing the mobile camera on top of a painting marker (see figure 2). At this time, 
augmented reality characters will start to appear, conducting the user experience through a didactical 
narrative and pedagogical activities (tests and serious games). The itinerary is short (3-5 minutes) and the 
gamification enriched by a system of points and awards to engage the user. The mobile app is linked to social 
networks (Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp) in a way that the user can share his/her experience and foster the 
implication of new users (figure 3).  
 
                                                           
7 http://catedra.lsi.uned.es/metadata/ 
8 https://unity3d.com 

 
 
Figure 2. 3D features and augmented reality in La Anunicación mobile app 
 
7. Conclusions 
The work developed within the MUSACCES project aims to improve the relation of people with disabilities with 
the artistic heritage in the Prado museum. The application of a user experience survey based on the Technology 
Acceptance Model has collected the interests of potential users with disabilities and determining the ease of 
use and the perception of utility of the technology to be used in the design of mobile learning itineraries. The 
extensive use of wireless technologies and connectivity tools, encourage the incorporation of these 
technologies to develop accessible itineraries, promoting interactivity and gamification within the learning 
design as shown in the first demo prototype.  
Describing virtual tours or stories in museums using narratives is also an area of research and development. 
Participation of the expert historians and educators has been inforce in the MUSACCES project by the use of a 
recently developed prototype of a web information system, which defines a series of concepts that will serve 
as a structure for the construction of a semantic graph of metadata and concepts through the narratives.  
8. Acknowledgments 
Authors gratefully acknowledge the support by MUSACCES (S2015/HUM3494). 
Figure 3. Screenshots from La Anunciacion mobile App 

 
9. References  
UN 
(2006) 
Convention 
on 
the 
Rights 
of 
Persons 
with 
Disabilities 
(CRPD). 
Available 
at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-
disabilities.html 
LIONDAU (2003) Ley 51/2003, de 2 de diciembre, de igualdad de oportunidades, no discriminación y 
accesibilidad 
universal 
de 
las 
personas 
con 
discapacidad. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.boe.es/buscar/doc.php?id=BOE-A-2003-22066 
Real Patronato Discapacidad (2011)  “Universal Accessibility to Cultural Heritage. Fundaments, Criteria and 
Guidelines” 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://www.mscbs.gob.es/ssi/discapacidad/docs/estrategia_cultura_para_todos.pdf 
CAST (2018). Universal Design for Learning Guidelines version 2.2. Wakefield, MA. Retrieved from: 
http://udlguidelines.cast.org 
Rodrigo, C., García-Serrano, A. & Sánchez-Elvira, A.  (2017). Narrative design combined with a TAM survey to 
achieve a multisensorial museum user-experience for people with disabilities. The Online, Open and Flexible 
Higher Education Conference 2017 - Higher Education for the Future; 'Accelerating and Strengthening 
Innovation'. Milton Keynes, October 2017. Editors George Ubachs and Lizzie Konings (EADTU) pp. 248 -260 
ISBN 978-90-79730-29-2 
Davis, F. D. (1993). User acceptance of information technology: system characteristics, user perceptions and 
behavioral impacts. International journal of man-machine studies, 38(3), 475-487. 
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of computer technology: a comparison of 
two theoretical models. Management science, 35(8), 982-1003. 
Rodrigo, C., Caro, M. & García-Serrano, A. (2017). Extensión del modelo TAM al análisis de requisitos de 
accesibilidad para el aprendizaje del patrimonio artístico del Museo del Prado con dispositivos móviles. III 
CONGRESO Humanidades Digitales Hispánicas - HDH 2017 Málaga (España) October, 18-20th, 2017 
Fundación Vodafone España (2016). Discapacidad, integración y el papel de las TIC (Report). Retrieved from: 
http://www.fundacionvodafone.es/sites/default/files/conclusiones_acc_1.pdf 
García-Serrano, A., Castellanos, A., Cigarrán, J. (2015). De la preservación digital al acceso semántico de 
documentos históricos. Retrieved from: http://hdh2015.linhd.es/ebook/HDH15.epub  
Doerr, M., Ore, C.-E., Stead, S. (2007). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model: A New Standard for Knowledge 
Sharing, 26th Int. Conf. Concept. Model. - Vol. 83: pp. 51–56. 
W3 Consortium, others (2014). JSON-LD 1.0: a JSON-based serialization for linked data. Retrieved from: 
https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/ 
Benavent J., X. Benavent, E. de Ves, R. Granados, A. García-Serrano. (2010) Experiences at ImageCLEF 2010 
using CBIR and TBIR Mixing Information Approaches. M. Braschler, D. Harman, E. Pianta (Eds.): CLEF 2010 LABs 
and Workshops, Notebook Papers, ISBN 978-88-904810-0-0, 22-23 September 2010, Padua, Italy. CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, Volume 1176. ISSN1613-0073 

 
Cigarrán J., Castellanos, A. Garcia-Serrano. (2016) A. A step forward for Topic Detection in Twitter: An FCA-
based Approach, Expert Systems with Applications Journal. Pergamon Press. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2016.03.011 
Vol 57, Pages:21-36, ISSN: 0957-4174 
Lastra-Díaz J. J., A. García-Serrano, A, M. Batet, M. Fernández, F. Chirigati (2017). HESML: a scalable ontology-based 
semantic similarity measures library with a set of reproducible experiments and a replication dataset. Information Systems. 
V 66, Pags 97-118, Pergamon, ISSN: 0306-4379 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2017.02.002 
García-Serrano, A., Castellanos, A. (2016). Conceptualización, acceso y visibilidad de la información en el 
proyecto DIMH. (Capítulo 16). Alicia Cámara Muñoz (Editora), Fundación Juanelo Turriano. pp: 379-400 ISBN: 
978-84-942695-6-1 
Mulholland, P., Wolff, A., Collins, T. (2012). Curate and storyspace: An ontology and web-based environment 
for describing curatorial narratives, LNCS 7295.  
Koenitz, H. (2013). Interactive storytelling, In: Proc. 6th ICIDS 
García-Serrano, A., Lara, A.  & Rodrigo, C.  (2017). Narrativas con acceso a datos en abierto: MPOC, un Sistema 
de información Web sobre el Museo del Prado. III CONGRESO Humanidades Digitales Hispánicas - HDH 2017. 
Málaga (España), October, 18-20 th 
CEN EN 301549 (2015) http://mandate376.standards.eu/standard 
 
 
View publication stats

