See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/352714478
Inclusion and accessibility in science museums: Voices from Brazil
Chapter · August 2021
CITATIONS
4
READS
195
3 authors:
Jessica Norberto Rocha
Fundação CECIERJ
132 PUBLICATIONS   609 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Mariana Fernandes
LIneA
5 PUBLICATIONS   12 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Luisa Massarani
Instituto Nacional de Comunicação Pública da Ciência e Tecnologia e SciDev.Net
343 PUBLICATIONS   2,493 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jessica Norberto Rocha on 11 September 2023.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

8
Introduction
Ensuring more equity-centered museums is not a simple task, particularly 
in the context of countries that face enduring economic and social inequali-
ties. Inclusion, or more accurately, exclusion has deep historical and cul-
tural roots, which involve a network of political, cultural, economic, and 
educational factors. Brazilian museums in general, and science museums in 
particular, reflect a long history of social exclusion, having been designed 
by and for the elites (see Cazelli et al., 2003; Lopes, 1997, 2003; Massarani 
& Moreira, 2016). Indeed, access to science was exclusive only to the most 
dominant classes in Brazilian society until the early 20th century (Massarani 
& Moreira, 2016).
Today there are at least 268 science museums in Brazil (Almeida et al., 
2015), yet unequal access remains an urgent issue. Attempts to democratize 
the museums’ use have had limited success. A 2019 survey found that only 
6.3% of Brazilians reported visiting a science museum and 24% visited 
zoos, environmental parks, and botanical gardens in the previous 12 months 
(CGEE, 2019). The main reasons for not visiting were generally reported 
as lack of proximity, lack of knowledge of their existence, low income, 
educational level, and urban violence (CGEE, 2019; OMCC, 2006; OMCC, 
2008). The lack of participation among populations with disabilities is 
projected to be even more extreme, although, importantly, there are no 
national data documenting the scope of the challenge.
People with disabilities1 inhabit all social spheres—they include children, 
young people, students, adults, varied professionals (e.g., teachers, 
scientists, professors, politicians, etc.) and they are residents of large cities 
and small rural towns. The Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics 
(IBGE), from data collected in the 2010 population census, found that 6.7% 
of the population (around 12.7 million Brazilians) reported having great 
difficulty or being unable to perform basic functions and activities in any 
way, suggesting the magnitude of the population with disabilities (Botelho 
& Porciúncula, 2018).
Social models of disability and 
museum research
Inclusion and accessibility in science 
museums: voices from Brazil
Jessica Norberto Rocha, Mariana Fernandes, 
and Luisa Massarani

﻿Social models of disability  129
Although the fight for the rights of people with disabilities has been 
underway for many decades, only more recently have science museums 
begun to attend to their inclusion (Norberto Rocha et al., 2020; Sarraf, 
2008, 2013). This chapter explores how the historically exclusionary field 
of science museums in Brazil can directly and substantially address the lack 
of inclusion of people with disabilities.
Accessibility in science museums and theoretical underpinnings
Accessibility not only supports people with disabilities but also the full 
swath of humanity who can benefit from fewer barriers and more diverse 
strategies for accessing information and experiences available in museums. 
In this chapter, however, we focus on accessibility for people with 
disabilities.
In 2006, the United Nations (UN) organized the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and its Optional Protocol to 
“promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities and to 
promote respect for their inherent dignity” (UN, 2006, article 1). Ollerton 
and Horsfall (2012) argue that the Convention “works alongside the 
Universal Declaration, articulating an explicit, social dimension to human 
rights and emphasizing the obligation of states to promote and protect the 
rights and dignity of disabled people” (p. 619).
The Convention highlights the right to participate in cultural activities 
under conditions of equality. After its publication, 162 countries, including 
Brazil and most Latin American countries, signed and ratified the 
Convention. In this way, the states have committed themselves to promoting 
equal access and the rights of people with disabilities. Since ratification, 
several laws have been enacted to support people with disabilities—e.g., 
Law No. 13.146 in Brazil (Brazil, 2015) and in other Latin American 
countries, such as in Argentina (2009), Chile (2010), Colombia (2013), 
Mexico (2011), and Uruguay (2010) (Ferreira & Norberto Rocha, 2017). 
However, as noted by Reich (2014, p. 2), “although museums have made 
great strides in the last 20 years to become more inclusive, the inclusion of 
people with disabilities in museum learning is still a specialized rather than 
a normalized practice.”
While museums typically focus themselves on physical accessibility 
(Lisney et al., 2013), in more recent years, there has been a growing concern 
with not only physical but experiential access. Many authors (Duarte & 
Cohen, 2012, 2018; Sarraf, 2008, 2013; Tojal, 2015) argue that museums’ 
accessibility also depends on attitudinal and communicational aspects, 
which are strongly related to welcoming, participation, inclusion, and 
emotional, affective, and intellectual factors (Cohen & Duarte, 2013). In 
this sense, Reich et al. (2010, p. 10), citing theories of social models of 
disability (Barnes, 2003; Polino, 2009) state that inclusion

130  Jessica Norberto Rocha et al.﻿
Goes further than ensuring that people with disabilities can enter the 
buildings or use the exhibits, programs and technologies that deliver 
such experiences. It also requires that people with disabilities are able 
to learn from such experiences and participate as a part of and not 
separate from, the larger social group and community.
Based on an extensive national and international literature review on 
accessibility and inclusion in museums and cultural places, Inacio (2017) 
proposed a research protocol called Accessibility Indicators for Science 
Museums and Centres, in which he highlighted relevant characteristics 
for consideration by science museums seeking to promote accessibility to 
different people with disabilities. A few years later, researchers at the group 
Museus e Centros de Ciências Acessíveis (MCCAC)2 subjected the protocol 
to a more systematic review, eliminating ambiguities and duplications in 
different categories (Abreu et al., 2019; Norberto Rocha et al., 2020).
The current version of this protocol now encompasses 1) physical 
accessibility, 2) attitudinal accessibility, and 3) communicational accessibility 
(Norberto Rocha et al., 2020). Each type of accessibility has two other 
subcategories (called “attributes”):
	 1)	 Physical accessibility: related to architecture and the design of objects 
and exhibitions within the physical space, physical accessibility refers 
to features that allow for mobility and barrier-free accessibility that 
ensure visitors’ autonomy and safety throughout the institution’s 
buildings and premises. Physical features and resources of exhibitions 
and objects are designed to consider, respect, and valorize visitors’ 
differing abilities and characteristics (ABNT, 2015; Cohen et al., 2012; 
Inacio, 2017; National Museums of Scotland, 2002). Its two attributes 
are 1a) physical access, accommodations, and use of space and 1b) 
design and use of objects.
	 2)	 Attitudinal accessibility: reflecting attitudes and initiatives aimed at 
overcoming biases, stereotypes, and stigmas regarding persons with 
disabilities, this attitudinal accessibility refers to policy matters, such 
as institutional missions, human resource training, incentives, funding, 
and programs. Inclusive practices and interventions are designed to 
create space for diversity (Corpas & Lyton, 2016; Inacio, 2017; Sarraf, 
2013; Tojal, 2015). Its two attributes are 2a) inclusive practices, 
welcome, and engagement and 2b) institutional policy.
	 3)	 Communicational accessibility: referring to the equipment and 
resources that make it possible to overcome barriers in interpersonal 
communication, including written and informational material, 
this comminicational accessibility covers onsite as well as external 
communications, which include visitor information on scheduling, ticket 
prices, exhibitions, location, and accessibility initiatives and which may 
take place over an institutional website, through informational folders 

﻿Social models of disability  131
or pamphlets, or by telephone. Its attributes are 3a) communications 
(onsite and external) and signage and 3b) media, equipment, resources, 
etc. to enhance communications (ABNT 2015; Inacio, 2017; Mineiro 
et al., 2014; Sarraf, 2013; Smithsonian Accessibility Program, 1996; 
Tojal, 2007, 2015; W3CBrasil, 2013).
Addressing accessibility
Since 2016, Group MCCAC in Rio de Janeiro has been investigating issues 
related to inclusion in science museums (Abreu et al., 2019; Fernandes, 
2020; Norberto Rocha et al., 2020; Inacio, 2017). In 2016, collaborating 
with the Latin American and Caribbean Network for the Popularisation 
of Science and Technology (RedPOP), Group MCCAC conducted a Latin 
America–wide survey among science museums to understand how they 
tackle accessibility. Some 109 institutions from ten countries answered 
the survey, with 67 Brazilian science museums and centers participating. 
The data gathered from the questionnaires completed by representatives of 
science museums and centers were analyzed using the revised Accessibility 
Indicators for Science Museums and Centre protocol.
Although this study found that the responding science museums and 
centers in Latin America are implementing strategies toward accessibility 
and inclusion, it also revealed a significant gap between policies and 
good intentions and regular practices for promoting full and equal 
enjoyment. Most of the actions reported involved the institutions’ physical 
infrastructures. However, at the most basic level, accessibility and inclusion 
were not incorporated into institutional policy and the allocation of 
financial resources. In short, they were not prioritized. The study revealed 
that only four institutions (out of 67 from Brazil) had earmarked funding to 
promote accessibility and only 19 had any projects or programs to promote 
accessibility. Furthermore, in the realm of communicational and attitudinal 
accessibility, museums lacked continued strategies for hiring, training, and 
supporting staff to effectively meet the needs of people with disabilities 
(Norberto Rocha et al., 2020).
These data highlight the continued absence of institutional practices that 
underpin a long-standing history of thinking about the inclusion of people 
with disabilities only in terms of physical access, with a notable dearth 
of strategies for overcoming communication and attitudinal barriers and 
ensuring visitors’ autonomy. The findings have stimulated the design of 
several follow-on quantitative and qualitative surveys and interviews to try 
understanding “how” and “why” institutional priorities and practices lag 
institutional intentions.
For example, in a recent study, Norberto Rocha et al. (in press) addressed 
how staff in direct contact with the museums’ audiences (i.e., science 
museum educators) understand accessibility and feel about their interac-
tions with people with disabilities. The online questionnaire was answered 

132  Jessica Norberto Rocha et al.﻿
by 298 individuals from 87 science museums across Brazil. Responding 
museum professionals reported gaps in their training, practice, and experi-
ence that make them feel apprehensive about providing services to the public 
with disabilities. Many of them report having received some type of acces-
sibility training, but they still feel unconfident, in large part because they 
lack practical experiences applying the training in the museums in which 
they work. These data are in agreement with a previous study by Carlétti 
and Massarani (2015) that surveyed 370 Brazilian science museum profes-
sionals with roughly 60% reporting feeling unprepared to serve people with 
disabilities and feeling insecure when interacting with them.
A second example involves a more local context: Fernandes (2020) 
studied a natural history and a science museum from Rio de Janeiro and 
interviewed four staff members—a manager (M1; M2) and an educator (E1; 
E2) from each one. Early results showed that the museums were unable to 
report how many people with disabilities visited them monthly or annually, 
nor did they have any information about the characteristics of disability 
their visitors might have. Yet research shows that knowing its audience 
is fundamental for museums seeking to create specific activities that can 
attract those who are not visiting (Levent & Reich, 2013).
Although they do not know how many people with disabilities are 
visiting them, the two museums in the study have been actively engaged in 
developing accessibility and inclusion strategies, including some strategies 
for physical and communicational accessibility. But they continue to face 
challenges in this process. The museum of natural history, for instance, 
provides different physical and communications accessibility strategies, 
such as ramps, tactile maps and exhibits, a mobile/tablet app—containing 
audio-description of the collection, augmented reality, and information—
and an adapted visitor guide for people with disabilities (Fernandes, 2020; 
Norberto Rocha et al., 2017). The science center has begun a process of 
modifying its interactive exhibition, creating a guided visit for people with 
hearing disabilities and providing physical and tactile tools for people with 
visual disabilities in displays that essentially depend on vision, such as the 
optics ones (Fernandes, 2020).
In the dimension of attitudinal accessibility, both museums’ managers 
described efforts to promote awareness-raising activities with teams (pre-
service and in-service) as a way to prepare the educators to overcome 
barriers resulting from gaps in physical and communications accessibility. 
These training activities include exploring sensory experiences, such as 
reducing their vision, hearing, and mobility, and offering courses, lectures, 
and workshops on Brazilian Sign Language (Libras).
In the interviews conducted with two museum educators (E1; E2), both 
described having received training from the museums where they work. 
They reported a belief that the barriers produced by the lack of physical or 
communicational accessibility in their institutions (which, in part, generates 
some frustration) could be overcome with their attitudes. E1 had already 

﻿Social models of disability  133
worked with a group with intellectual disabilities and E2 had worked with 
a school group containing one student with attention deficit disorder. But at 
the time of the interview, neither of them had had experience with audiences 
with visual, physical, or hearing disabilities, which means that they had little 
practical experience in serving audiences with diverse disabilities.
Both educators expressed commitments to the theme of inclusion, possibly 
due to the training they received, and were aware of the potential barriers 
that the museums and their exhibitions could present to people with disabili-
ties. Having the training was important, particularly for preparing them emo-
tionally and intellectually to embrace working with visitors with disabilities, 
even if they were not entirely technically prepared to do so. For example, E1 
stated that his expectations when serving the public with disabilities were 
to ensure that visitors had a good experience at the museum: “Our aim is 
[for] the person to be able to experiment and have a great experience in the 
museum” (E1). When asked about his feeling of preparedness to serve the 
visually disabled audiences, he answered that although there may be difficul-
ties and interpersonal issues, he feels prepared, since there is support given 
by the museum, such as lectures and training. E2, however, pointed out that 
one of the possible barriers was that, despite having received training, she still 
did not feel technically prepared, only emotionally, and that she sought ways 
to feel more empowered about accessibility. In both cases, our study found 
that there is a theoretical preparation for serving people with disabilities but 
that self-confidence is still wanting in this service. In other words, the train-
ing does not provide practical experience with these audiences, which would 
bring greater comfort and self-confidence for museum educators.
An important issue raised in the interviews is the institutional chal-
lenge of implementing accessibility without the prioritization of financial 
resources. This situation may be explained partially by the political and 
economic crises museums are confronting in the country. In 2003 Brazil 
entered a political period grounded in social inclusion and the reduction 
of social inequalities, as the government moved to enact policies to popu-
larize science (Ferreira, 2014; Massarani & Moreira, 2016). Grants were 
offered by the Ministry of Science and Technology through public calls by 
its Department of Science, Technology, and Social Inclusion and its Office 
for the Popularization and Diffusion of Science and Technology, which 
had played essential roles in sustaining public policies in science commu-
nication, including science museums and centers (Massarani & Moreira, 
2016). In 2014, however, the average number of federal and state grants 
in the area of the popularization of science declined and no grant programs 
were assigned specifically for science museums, negatively impacting the 
quantity and quality of initiatives. Two years later, in 2016, Brazil faced 
critical presidential changes and, consequently, changes to its public poli-
cies. The Ministry of Science and Technology came under attack and the 
Department of Science, Technology, and Social Inclusion and its Office for 
the Popularization and Diffusion of Science and Technology was shut down 

134  Jessica Norberto Rocha et al.﻿
(Norberto Rocha, 2017). Since then, funds have become tighter and the 
political power of museums has diminished, revealing an underlying vulner-
ability of the sector, with many science museums closing and others strug-
gling to survive. Within this context, if accessibility and inclusion are not 
clearly stated as a mission or policy of the museum, it is difficult for finan-
cial decision-makers to prioritize it.
Indeed, Fernandes (2020) found that the managers interviewed saw the 
lack of financial resources as the most significant obstacle faced by the 
management professionals when implementing accessibility and inclusion 
practices: “We have a huge lack of resources. I think there is also a lack of 
political will for more resources to come but, today, the lack of resources is 
the main issue” (M1). M2 also gave examples of how the lack of resources 
for accessibility impacts access barriers:
For us, the biggest problem is the physical space and lack of money 
to adapt the exhibition. What is very low cost comes from the team’s 
own resources [laughs]. What is expensive, which depends on a more 
specialized workforce … [depends on other sources]. So, our main 
concern is money.
(M2)
Another issue linked to the lack of continuous resources for accessibility 
is the uncertainty and absence of job security for staff working with 
accessibility in museums. As M1 and M2 noted, such staff are usually 
hired through outreach and research grants and, in the scenario of little or 
uncertain funding for these areas, it is not known for how long they will be 
able to count on these professionals in their teams:
On the one hand, we have managed to keep our jobs; on the other hand, 
it is always a concern that you do not know how many professionals 
you will have per year. … If I have five people in the year, in the next 
year I have three. [Thus] there are two fewer actions [that we can do] 
not having these people. Many of the activities are immensely impacted 
by the lack of resources. The project would go much faster if we had the 
resources. And it wouldn’t even have to be a lot of money.
(M1)
The instability and uncertainty that hang over the teams also impact their 
training. Although both museums carry out in-service training activities at 
least twice a year, staff turnover affects solid training, especially those assist-
ing visitors. One more challenge declared by the interviewed managers is 
not often having staff with disabilities joining their teams, a phenomenon 
that has also been noted across Latin American science museums (Norberto 
Rocha et al., 2020). In the science center, there is an educator who is deaf 
and another who has a visual disability, but their positions are unstable. The 

﻿Social models of disability  135
natural history museum does not yet have people with disabilities as part of 
their team: “Although we really want to, we still did not have the opportu-
nity to have staff with disabilities” (M1).
Conclusion
If, on the one hand, we recognize that science museums are aware of the need 
to implement actions that favor the inclusion of different types of audiences 
and have tried to be more equity-centered, on the other hand, there are still 
barriers to be overcome, such as the lack of institutional policies and funding. 
Specifically, when we address the inclusion of audiences with disabilities, 
we see that, although Brazilian science museums have gradually developed 
strategies, programs, and policies toward accessibility, these programs still 
need to become part of their stated missions.
The data collected by our research group indicate that, on the one hand, 
science museums have been looking for strategies to train their educators 
and teams to assist people with disabilities and are seeing this action as 
a means to overcome barriers caused by some inaccessible structures and 
exhibitions. Managers, on the other hand, still have many uncertainties 
regarding the continuity of activities, teams, and funding. Meanwhile, 
museums’ staff often recognize the importance of thinking about more 
inclusive strategies and attitudes, but they do not always feel confident to 
work with people with disabilities. Those we interviewed claim they lack 
the practical part of interacting with people with disabilities, that is, the 
day-to-day and practical experiences that only happen when these audiences 
essentially enter, remain in, and enjoy science museums and their services.
Thus, we understand that to make museums increasingly accessible, it 
is necessary to have institutional policies, budgets, and strategies that meet 
the specificities of visitors with disabilities. Of course, money by itself does 
not solve everything. The three types of accessibility—physical, attitudinal, 
and communications—run together, are complementary and interrelated. 
For example, museums that prioritize access need to account for it in their 
admissions processes and audience-counting methods. It is also necessary 
to rethink the way the museum works, so that the inclusion process stops 
being a sum of individual projects and efforts and becomes a part of the 
institution’s long-standing history, increasingly aiming to create more 
equity-centered museums (see Bevan et al., 2018).
Finally, we highlight that, in this text, we discuss data that reflect the 
museums’ institutional and professional perspectives. However, our research 
group has also developed research and discussions aimed at the experience 
and perspectives of different visitor groups—people with disabilities, chil-
dren, teenagers, families, etc. (see Fernandes, 2020; Massarani et al., 2019a, 
2019b, 2019c, 2019d; Norberto Rocha et al., 2021; Passos dos Santos, 
2019). Fernandes (2020), investigating the experience of groups of adults 
with visual disabilities in the natural history museum and the science center, 

136  Jessica Norberto Rocha et al.﻿
found that people use and interact with exhibitions in their own ways. This 
study suggests the importance of conducting further research on the acces-
sibility strategies offered by the visitors. For instance, while some preferred 
to read the Braille signs and touch the objects, others preferred to listen to 
the museum educator’s oral description. In the words of one of the visitors: 
“A person with a visual disability will not necessarily want to do all the 
activity the museum prepared for them. It is an option, always an option.” 
In this sense, offering more than one communication tool or strategy may 
be essential for enhancing visitors’ autonomy, recognizing that visitors with 
disabilities may not always want to have a fully mediated visit. Also, as a 
part of the attitudinal accessibility, it is necessary to respect the visitors’ time 
and choices, and the museum’s staff need to be prepared to recognize this. 
Importantly, a strategy designed for people with visual disabilities will not 
serve the entire audience in question. Within each kind of disability, there 
is a wide range of diversity and specificities. Blázquez (2015) notes diversity 
within disabilities as a further challenge for institutions when planning their 
accessibility actions. For this reason, it is essential to have more studies that 
highlight the perspective of visitors with a wide range of disabilities.
Thus, we agree with Levent and Reich (2013) that learning from visitors 
is essential, since only they can tell us about their actual needs, their per-
sonal stories, and, most importantly, what they look for in the experience 
that the museum can provide. There is a need to understand the audiences 
(that is, to know who the people are that visit and do not visit museums, 
where they are from, what their interests are, and what their demands are, 
among other relevant information) if we are ever, at scale, going to realize 
more equity-centered museums.
Acknowledgments
Dr. Jessica Norberto Rocha thanks FAPERJ for the Jovem Cientista do 
Nosso Estado (JCNE) grant. Dr. Luisa Massarani thanks the CNPq for a 
productivity grant and FAPERJ for the Cientista do Nosso Estado (CNE) 
grant. All authors thank the science museums and the museum managers 
and educators for their participation in our studies.
Notes
1	 The Brazilian Law on the Inclusion of People with Disabilities (Brazil, 2015, 
article 2) states: “a person with a disability is one who has a long-term physical, 
mental, intellectual or sensory impairment, which, in interaction with one or 
more barriers, may obstruct their full and effective participation in society on 
equal terms with other people.”
2	 MCCAC stands for “Accessible Science Museums and Centers”; see https://gru-
pomccac​.org​/en/.

﻿Social models of disability  137
References
Associação Brasileira de Normas Técnicas (ABNT). (2015). ABNT NBR 9050: 
2015 - Acessibilidade a edificações, mobiliário, espaços e equipamentos 
urbanos(Accessibility to buildings, equipament and the urban environment). 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 148p. http:​/​/www​.mpf.​mp​.br​/atua​cao​-t​emati​ca​/pf​dc​/
te​​mas​/i​​nclus​​ao​-de​​-pess​​oas​-c​​om​-de​​ficie​​ncia/​​legis​​lacao​​/​abnt​​-nbr-​​9​-050​​-2015​​/
view​
Abreu de, W. V., Norberto Rocha, J., Massarani, L., Inacio, L. G. B., & Molenzani, 
A. O. (2019). Acessibilidade em planetários e observatórios astronômicos: uma 
análise de 15 instituições brasileiras. JCOM – América Latina, 2(2), A04. https://
doi​.org​/10​.22323​/3​.02020204.
Almeida, C. Brito, F., Ferreira, R., Massarani, L., & Amorim, L. (2015). Centros e 
Museus de Ciência do Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: ABCMC; Casa da Ciência/UFRJ; 
Museu da Vida/Fiocruz.
Barnes, C. (2003). What a difference a decade makes: Reflections on doing 
‘emancipatory’ disability research. Disability and Society, 18(1), 3–18.
Bevan, B., Calabrese Barton, A., & Garibay, C. (2018). Broadening Perspectives on 
Broadening Participation in STEM: Critical Perspectives on the Role of Science 
Engagement. Washington, DC: Center for Advancement of Informal Science 
Education. Retrieved from https​:/​/ww​w​.inf​ormal​scien​ce​.or​g​/sit​es​/de​fault​/file​s​/
BP-​Repor​t​.pdf​ (acessed December 1, 2020).
Blázquez, Á. L. G. (2015) La accesibilidad para personas ciegas y con deficiencia 
visual al patrimonio cultural y natural. her&mus, 16, VII(1), 47–54. Retrieved 
from https​:/​/ww​w​.rac​o​.cat​/inde​x​.php​/Herm​us​/ar​ticle​/view​/3132​53 (acessed 
December 1, 2020).
Brazil. (2015).Lei n. 13.146, de 6 de julho de 2015. Retrieved from http:​/​/www​.plan​
alto.​gov​.b​r​/cci​vil​_0​3/​_At​o2015​-2018​/2015​/​Lei/​L1314​6​.htm​ (accessed September 
28, 2020).
Botelho, L., & Porciúncula, K. (2018). Os desafios para a produção de indicadores 
sobre pessoa com deficiência – ontem, hoje e amanhã. In Simões, A., Athias, 
L., & Botelho, L. (Orgs.) Panorama nacional e internacional da produção de 
indicadores sociais: grupos populacionais específicos e uso do tempo. Rio de 
Janeiro: IBGE, Coordenação de População e Indicadores Sociais.
Carlétti, C., & Massarani, L. (2015). Explainers of science centers and museums: A 
study on these stakeholders in the mediation between science and the public in 
Brazil. Journal of Science Communication, 14(2), 1–17. https://doi​.org​/10​.22323​
/2​.14020201.
Cazelli, S., Marandino, M., & Studart; D. C. (2003). Educação e Comunicação 
em Museus de Ciência: aspectos históricos, pesquisa e prática. In: Gouvea, G., 
Marandino, M., Leal, M. C. (Orgs.). Educação e Museu: A construção social do 
caráter educativo dos museus de ciência. Rio de Janeiro: Access.
CGEE - Centro de Gestão e Estudos Estratégicos. (2019). Percepção pública da C&T 
no Brasil −2019. Retrieved from https​:/​/ww​w​.cge​e​.org​.br​/d​ocume​nts​/1​0195/​73406​​
3​/CGE​E​_res​umoex​ecuti​vo​_Pe​rcepc​ao​_pu​b​_CT.​pdf (accessed September 28, 2020). 
Cohen, R., & Duarte, C. R. (2013). Subsídios metodológicos na construção de uma 
“acessibilidade plena”: A produção da identidade e da subjetividade de pessoas 
com deficiência. Revista Benjamin Constant, Oct., ed.3.
AU: Please 
provide citation 
for the reference 
‘Barnes 2003; 
Polino 2019’ 
in the text 
or delete the 
reference from 
the list.

138  Jessica Norberto Rocha et al.﻿
Cohen, R., Duarte, C. R., & Brasileiro, A. (2012). Acessibilidade a Museus. 
Ministério da Cultura / Instituto Brasileiro de Museus. Brasília, DF: MinC/Ibram. 
Cadernos Museológicos 2. 
Corpas, F., & Lyton, D. (2016). Caderno Acessibilidades, (1), 11–115. Rio de 
Janeiro: Oi Futuro - Museu das Telecomunicações.
Duarte, C., & Cohen, R. (2012). Acessibilidade e desenho universal: fundamentação 
e revisão bibliográfica para pesquisas. Relatório Técnico do Núcleo Pró-acesso. 
Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ. 
Duarte, C., & Cohen, R. (2018). Acessibilidade emocional. In: Villarouco, V. (Ed.), 
VII Encontro Nacional de Ergonomia do Ambiente Construído / VIII Seminário 
Brasileiro de Acessibilidade Integral. Blucher Design Proceedings. São Paulo: 
Blucher. https://doi​.org/​10​.5151​/eneac2018​-duarte
Fernandes, M. P. (2020). A experiência de pessoas com deficiência visual: a 
acessibilidade e a inclusão no Museu da Geodiversidade (UFRJ) e na Casa da 
Descoberta (UFF). Master’s thesis in Communication of Science, Technology 
and Health. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Oswaldo Cruz Foundation. https://doi​.org/​10​
.13140​/RG​.2​.2​.14129​.81767
Ferreira, J. R. (2014). Popularização da ciência e as políticas públicas no Brasil 
(2003–2012). PhD dissertation in Biological Sciences (Biophysics). Rio de Janeiro, 
RJ: IBCCF, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
Ferreira, F., & Norberto Rocha, J. (2017). Leis de inclusão da pessoa com 
deficiência em países da América Latina: diálogos sobre o acesso a museus e 
espaços científico-culturais. In: V Encontro Nacional de Acessibilidade Cultural. 
Rio de Janeiro.
Inacio, L. G. B. (2017). Indicadores de acessibilidade em museus e centros de 
ciências: aplicação na Caravana da Ciência. Capstone Project in Science Teaching 
with an Emphasis on Biology and Chemistry. Rio de Janeiro: Federal Institute of 
Rio de Janeiro.
Levent, N., & Reich, C. (2013). Museum accessibility: Combining audience research 
and staff training. Journal of Museum Education, 38(2), 218–226. https​:/​/do​i​.org​
/10​.1​080​/1​05986​50​.20​1​3​.11​51077​2
Lisney, E., Bowen, J. P., Hearn, K., & Zedda, M. (2013). Museums and technology: 
Being inclusive helps accessibility for all. Curator: The Museum Journal. 56(3), 
353–362. https://doi​.org​/10​.1111​/cura​.12034
Lopes, M. M. (1997). O Brasil descobre a pesquisa científica: os museus de ciências 
naturais no século XIX. São Paulo, SP: Hucitec.
Lopes, M. M. (2003). Museus e Educação na América Latina: o modelo parisiense e 
os vínculos com as Universidades. In: Gouvea, G., Marandino, M., & Leal, M. C. 
(Orgs.). Educação e Museu: A construção social do caráter educativo dos museus 
de ciência. Rio de Janeiro: Access.
Massarani, L., Chagas, C., Rocha, L., Rowe, S., & Fontanetto, R. (2019a). Children’s 
protagonism in a science exhibition: An exploratory study of an exhibition in 
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). Research in Science Education. https​:/​/do​i​.org​/10​.1​007​/s​
11165​-019​-​09886​-w
Massarani, L., Fazio, M. E., Norberto Rocha, J., Dávila, A. E. S., & Bognanni, F. 
A. (2019b). La interactividad en los museos de ciencias, pivote entre expectativas 
y hechos empíricos: el caso del Centro Interactivo de Ciencia y Tecnología 
Abremate (Argentina). Ciência & Educação (Bauru), 25(2), 467–484. https​:/​/dx​
.doi.​org​/1​0​.159​0​/151​6​-731​32​019​00200​12

﻿Social models of disability  139
Massarani, L., & Moreira, I. (2016). Science communication in Brazil: A historical 
review and considerations about the current situation. Anais da Academia 
Brasileira de Ciências, 88(3), 1577–1595. https​:/​/do​i​.org​/10​.1​590​/0​001​-3​76520​
16201​50338​
Massarani, L., Poenaru, L. M., Norberto Rocha, J., Rowe, S., & Falla, S. (2019c). 
Adolescents learning with exhibits and explainers: The case of Maloka. 
International Journal of Science Education, Part B, 9 (3), 1–15. https​:/​/do​i​.org​
/10​.1​080​/2​15484​55​.20​19​.16​46439​
Massarani, L., Reznik, G., Norberto Rocha, J., Falla, S., Rowe, S., Martins, A. D., 
& Amorim, L. H. (2019d). A experiência de adolescentes ao visitar um museu de 
ciência: um estudo no Museu da Vida. Ensaio Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências 
(Belo Horizonte), 21. https​:/​/do​i​.org​/10​.1​590​/1​983​-2​1172​0​19210​115
Mineiro, C., Mendes, E., & Colwell, E. (2014). Temas de Museologia: Museus e 
Acessibilidade. Lisbon: Instituto Português de Museus, Portugal. Retrieved from 
http:​/​/www​​.iber​​museo​​s​.org​​/wp​-c​​onten​​t​/upl​​oads/​​2020/​​05​/mu​​seus-​​e​-ace​​ssi​bi​​lidad​​
e​-por​.pdf (accessed November 5, 2020).
National Museums of Scotland. (2002). Exhibitions for All: A Practical Guide to 
Designing Inclusive Exhibitions. Edinburgh: NMS Publishing Ltd. 
Norberto Rocha, J. (2017). Museus e centros de ciências ameaçados no país. Ciência 
e Cultura, 69(1), 14–15. https​:/​/dx​.doi.​org​/1​0​.218​00​/23​17​-66​60201​70001​00007​
Norberto Rocha, J., Alvaro, M., Massarani, L., & Abreu de, W. V. (in press). 
Acessibilidade em museus de ciências: A perspectiva de mediadores brasileiros. 
Interfaces Científicas – Humanas e Sociais.
Norberto Rocha, J., Cunha, E., Massarani, L., Coelho, P., & Dahmouche, M. S. 
(2021). Uma exposição sobre a física dos esportes pelo olhar de adolescentes: um 
estudo de caso no Museu Ciência e Vida. Florianópolis, SC: Caderno Brasileiro 
De Ensino De Física, UFSC.
Norberto Rocha, J., Massarani, L., Abreu de, W. V., Inacio, L. G. B., & Molenzani, 
A. O. (2020). Investigating accessibility in Latin American science museums and 
centers. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências, 92(1). https​:/​/do​i​.org​/10​.1​590​
/0​001​-3​76520​202​01​91156​.
Norberto Rocha, J., Massarani, L., Gonçalves, J., Ferreira, F., Abreu de, W. V., 
Molenzani, A., & Inacio, L. G. B. (2017). Guia de Museus e Centros de Ciências 
Acessíveis da América Latina e do Caribe (1st ed). Rio de Janeiro: Museu da Vida/ 
/Fiocruz; RedPOP. Retrieved from https​:/​/gr​upomc​cac​.o​rg​/wp​-cont​ent​/u​pload​s​
/201​7​/12/​GUIA-​PT​_au​diode​scriç​ão​-e-​leito​r​-de-​tela​s​.pdf (accessed September 28, 
2020).
Ollerton, J., & Horsfall, D. (2012). Rights to research: Utilising the convention on 
the rights of persons with disabilities as an inclusive participatory action research 
tool. Disability & Society, 28(5), 616–630. https​:/​/do​i​.org​/10​.1​080​/0​96875​99​.20​
12​.71​7881
Observatório de Museus e Centros Culturais (OMCC). (2006). Pesquisa Piloto 
Perfil-Opinião 2005. Onze Museus e seus visitantes. Rio de Janeiro e Niterói. 
Rio de Janeiro: Museu da Vida/Fiocruz.
Observatório de Museus e Centros Culturais (OMCC). (2008). Pesquisa Perfil-
Opinião 2006–2007. Museus e visitantes de São Paulo. Rio de Janeiro: Museu 
da Vida/Fiocruz.
Passos dos Santos, K. K. (2019). Territórios pouco explorados: os registros de 
visitantes em livros de comentários da Casa da Ciência e Museu Ciência e Vida. 
AQ: TITLE

140  Jessica Norberto Rocha et al.﻿
Master’s thesis in Communication of Science, Technology and Health. Rio de 
Janeiro: Oswaldo Cruz Foundation. Retrieved from http:​/​/ppg​dc​.co​c​.fio​cruz.​br​/
im​ages/​disse​rtaco​es​/di​ssert​aca​o_​kamyl​la​.pd​f (accessed December 1st, 2020). 
Polino, C. (2019). Públicos de la ciencia y desigualdad social en América Latina. 
JCOM – América Latina, 2(2), A05. https://doi​.org​/10​.22323​/3​.02020205.
Reich, C., Price, J., Rubin, E., & Steiner, M. (2010). Inclusion, Disabilities, and 
Informal Science Learning. A CAISE Inquiry Group Report. Washington, DC: 
Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education (CAISE). Retrieved from 
https​:/​/ww​​w​.inf​​ormal​​scien​​ce​.or​​g​/sit​​es​/de​​fault​​/file​​s​/Inc​​lusio​​nDisa​​bilit​​iesan​​dInfo​
rmalS​cienc​eEduc​ation​.pdf (accessed September 28, 2020).
Reich, C. A. (2014). Taking Action Toward Inclusion: Organizational Change 
and the Inclusion of People with Disabilities in Museum Learning. PhD thesis 
dissertation. Department of Curriculum and Instruction, Lynch School of 
Education, Boston College. 
Sarraf, V. (2008). Reabilitação no Museu: Políticas de Inclusão Cultural por meio da 
Acessibilidade. Master’s thesis in Information Science, School of Communication 
and Arts. São Paulo: University of São Paulo.
Sarraf, V. (2013). A Comunicação dos sentidos nos espaços culturais brasileiros: 
estratégias de mediações e acessibilidade para pessoas com suas diferenças. PhD 
thesis in Communication and Semiotics. São Paulo: Pontifical Catholic University 
of São Paulo.
Smithsonian Accessibility Program. (1996). Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible 
Exhibition Design. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved from 
https​:/​/ww​​w​.sif​​acili​​ties.​​si​.ed​​u​/ae_​​cente​​r​/pdf​​/Acce​​ssibl​​e​-Exh​​ibi​ti​​on​-De​​sign.​​pdf 
(accessed August 4, 2019).
Tojal, A. (2007). Políticas Públicas de Inclusão de Públicos Especiais em Museus. 
PhD dissertation in information Science, School of Communications and Arts. 
São Paulo: Universidade de São Paulo. 
Tojal, A. (2015). Política de Acessibilidade Comunicacional em Museus: para quê 
e para quem? Museologia e Interdisciplinaridade, 4(7). https​:/​/do​i​.org​/10​.2​6512/​
museo​logia​.v4​i7​.1677​9
United Nations. (2006). Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD). Retrieved from https​:/​/ww​w​.un.​org​/d​evelo​pment​/desa​/disa​bilit​ies​/c​
onven​tion-​on​-th​e​-rig​hts​-o​f​-per​sons-​w​ith-​disab​iliti​es​.ht​ml (accessed September 
28, 2020).
W3C Brasil. (2013). Cartilha de Acessibilidade na web. W3C e Ministério Público 
do Estado de São Paulo. Retrieved from http:​/​/www​.w3c.​br​/pu​b​/Mat​eriai​s​/Pub​
licac​oesW3​C​/car​tilha​w3cbr​acess​ibili​dade-​web- fasciculo​-I​.h​tml (accessed July 
2016).
View publication stats

