Designing Inclusive Cultural Heritage Experiences – an 
Academic Course on Enhancing Museum Accessibility for 
Cognitive Impairment Visitors 
Alexandra Danial-Saad, Yael Avni, Julia Sheidin and Tsvi Kuflik 
The University of Haifa, Abba Khoushy Ave 199, Haifa, 3498838, Israel  
Abstract 
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in exploring the potential of state-of-the-art technologies 
to enhance the museum visit experience of cognitively impaired visitors. However, developing cultural 
heritage experiences for cognitively impaired visitors is not straightforward, and multiple factors, including 
knowledge about the available opportunities, desires, barriers, and abilities, affect their participation. This 
paper presents a multidisciplinary graduate course that collaborates with museum staff and cognitively 
impaired visitors to explore techniques for designing and developing such experiences.  The goal is to apply 
universal design principles, user-centered design and co-design approaches to make the cultural heritage 
accessible and enhance the museum visit experience of individuals with cognitive impairment.  
Keywords  
Cultural heritage, Cognitive impairment, Museum experience, Inclusive design, Technology innovation, 
Inclusive Museum, Academic course, Digital accessibility. 
 1 
1. Introduction 
Museums have a major role in society, evolving from repositories of art and artifacts to cultural 
educators [31]. Despite the shift towards free-choice learning, where visitors determine their learning 
path, the traditional museum setup involving displays within glass cases and on walls poses challenges 
for individuals with disabilities. This includes limited exploration opportunities due to the nature of 
exhibit placements and the inaccessibility of artifacts. Museum labels, often concise yet informative, 
can be challenging for people with disabilities, particularly those with visual, cognitive, or motor 
impairments. This explains why only 7% of museum visitors have disabilities [3]. Encouraging 
inclusivity within museums and galleries can lead to a more diverse audience, allowing a broader range 
of visitors to engage with and gain value from the cultural offerings fully [21]. Assistive and digital 
accessibility technologies can create a more authentic experience, potentially bringing the user closer 
to previously inaccessible artifacts and sites and enabling them to function independently and with 
dignity [10][14][15]. Well-adapted technology may contribute to the visitors’ varied needs, thereby 
encouraging participation, self-esteem, and quality of experience [8].  
Exploration of museum accessibility, especially for individuals with cognitive impairments 
(including Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (IDD), sensory hypersensitivity, and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)) is an evolving and crucial aspect of cultural inclusivity that 
museums have only recently begun to address. Accessibility for these individuals involves considering 
how information is presented, how exhibits are designed, and how interactions are facilitated [11]. 
 
Workshop on Advanced Visual Interfaces and Interactions in Cultural Heritage (AVICH 2024), June 4th, 2024, co-located with 
the 17th ACM Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, Arenzano (Genoa), Italy 
 asaad@univ.haifa.ac.il (A. Danial-Saad); yaeliv@gmail.com (Y. Avni); sheidin.julia@gmail.com (J. Sheidin); 
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il (T. Kuflik) 
 0000-0002-2904-8548 (A. Danial-Saad); 0009-0005-3723-6150 (Y. Avni); 0009-0002-9092-7231 (J. Sheidin); 0000-0003-
0096-4240 (T. Kuflik) 
 
© 2024 Copyright for this paper by its authors. 
Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).  
 CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)  
  
CEUR
Workshop
Proceedings
ceur-ws.org
ISSN 1613-0073

Despite the recent heightened interest in accommodating these impairments, literature has primarily 
focused on simplifying text [17]. For example, many museums have created social stories and other 
visual guides that use pictures and simple text to prepare children for the sights, sounds, smells, and 
possible tastes and objects to touch [5]. Notably, Guedes et al. [11] conducted an evaluation of 
museum websites and applications and suggested guidelines to support the design of accessible 
materials for people with IDD. To effectively support individuals with IDD, they highlighted the 
importance of upholding consistency and simplicity, significantly enhancing the overall user 
experience.  
We aim to equip developers with the skills necessary to create inclusive systems. This initiative 
builds on the achievements of our previous "Advanced Technologies in Development and 
Rehabilitation" course, which was acclaimed by both the museum and its target audience 
representatives [2]. In our previous course, our collaborative work generated various 
recommendations for improving the accessibility of exhibits and their accompanying  information for 
blind visitors within museums. Now, we are shifting our focus toward developing technologies 
specifically designed to accommodate the needs of individuals with cognitive impairments. 
2. Background and Related Work 
Accessibility in museums has different meanings. It involves criteria that highlight a holistic and 
inclusive approach to museum accessibility, considering not just the museum's physical environment 
but also the broader experience of all visitors [10]. To ensure accessibility for all visitors, there are 
several guidelines by the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) that museums should follow [23]. 
Accessibility considerations listed in the Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible Design include but are 
not limited to, public spaces, furniture, color usage, language and label design, text choices, interactive 
elements, and circulation routes [27]. In recent years, accessibility also focused  on integrating 
innovative technologies to enhance experiences for visitors with disabilities. Therefore, it is very 
important to consider accessibility in the development and deployment of new technologies in 
museums [4]. This helps create a more authentic experience, potentially bringing the user closer to 
previously inaccessible artifacts and sites [10]. 
Guidelines for museum accessibility for cognitive visitors  
The “Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible Exhibition Design” offers museums a set of guidelines as 
well as design tools to meet the world accessibility standard [12]. Below are provided indicative 
guidelines specifically tailored to address accessibility for cognitive disabilities: 
• 
“Offer a programmatic path for traveling through the exhibition. People with cognitive 
disabilities, like most individuals, learn best from an orderly presentation. An exhibition that 
reveals its topic through an obvious storyline, theme, or repeated element offers landmarks, 
repetition, and a connecting thread to follow a complex presentation” (p. 7). 
• 
“Include people with disabilities in exhibition topics, photographs, and presentations of 
perspectives” (p. 7). 
• 
“Present information to all the senses. Multisensory presentations provide choices for the 
sensory channel used and interesting repetitions of key points. Some people, however, have 
difficulty sorting overlapping sights and sounds” (p. 7).  
• 
“Tactile experiences can greatly assist people with cognitive disabilities” (p. 12). 
• 
“Use readily legible typefaces. The typefaces that are easiest for people with low vision, language 
problems, or cognitive disabilities are sans serif or simple serif. Maintain consistent label 
locations throughout the exhibition for ease of finding. Use easily legible typefaces like ‘sans serif’ 
or ‘simple serif’” (p. 19). 

• 
“Instructions are more effective for people with cognitive disabilities if participant action is 
required after each direction rather than after a string of directions. This step-action-step format 
assists people with short-term memory problems” (p. 28). 
• 
“Provide touch-sensitive areas in predictable locations that are at least 75 mm (3 in.) in diameter. 
Small touch areas require fine muscle control. If areas are too small, people with cerebral palsy 
or other mobility impairments often activate unwanted areas instead of or in addition to those 
selected” (p. 32). 
3. Method  
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in exploring the potential of state-of-the-art 
technologies to enhance the museum visiting experience for visitors with cognitive impairment. Our 
goal is to train students (developers to be) to design and develop such innovative systems inspired by 
the work of Umanski and Avni [29], Newell et al. [18] and Cavazos et al. [6], where student teams 
conceived and realized inventive systems. To accomplish this, we have adopted the Project-Based 
Learning (PBL) approach as our core pedagogic method [9]. This methodology prioritizes practical, 
hands-on projects, enabling collaboration among students in small groups and applying theoretical 
concepts in real-world contexts. Following the paradigms of universal design principles [1][28], user-
centered design [20] and of co-design [24], students gain a deeper understanding and involvement in 
the technology development process to enhance museum accessibility. 
3.1 Conceptual Framework and Technologies  
Our goal is to train a multidisciplinary team of students (developers to be) to design and develop an 
accessible environment for cognitively impaired people by exploring the potential of advanced 
technologies (intelligent user interfaces) using the user-centered design (UCD) approach, involving 
students and lecturers with technological background and experience (from the information systems 
department) and students and lecturers with therapy experience and background (from the 
department of occupational therapy) using design approach. The course will combine theoretical and 
practical aspects aimed at developing several experiential kits (for specific cultural heritage topics) for 
cognitively impaired visitors. The course will follow a co-creation approach where the students will be 
introduced to the human-centered design approach [26], design thinking methodologies [19], and 
interaction design principles [13], and co-design [24], as well as to the Human Activity Assistive 
Technology (HAAT) model [7]; the Matching Person and Technology (MPT) model [25]  and the 7 
universal design principles focusing on the User-Centered Design (UCD) approach to ensure that the 
product or prototype meets the needs, wants, and expectations of its intended users [16][30]. Based 
on all these models and principles, the students will work together with individuals with cognitive 
impairments and the museum staff to better understand the challenge and the opportunities, to 
design the experience, create three dimensional (3D) models of museum artifacts, print 3D replicas 
and augment them with audio commentary where input methods such as pushbuttons, 
microswitches, and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) scanning technologies will be used to 
activate the audio in context. 
3.2  Implementation  
After an introductory lesson, the students will split into groups of four students. The museum staff 
will select several topics and artifacts related to each theme. To ensure that the suggested concepts 
meet the needs of individuals with cognitive impairments users, the development process includes all 
stages of the Design Thinking method from UCD [19]:  

1. Empathy: The students generate empathy and familiarity with the field of development by talking 
with the museum staff, accompanying individuals with cognitive impairments during the visit to 
the museum, and reviewing relevant literature. 
2. Define & Ideate: The teams will be asked to present their concepts based on literature reviews 
and user interviews while producing quick prototypes (such as video prototypes and cardboard 
prototypes) to communicate better and refine their ideas. This will include creative thinking about 
using relevant state-of-the-art technologies, including 3D replicas of objects within multimodal 
interaction systems that deliver information through visual, auditory, and haptic feedback, 
catering to various learning styles and sensory needs. Augmented reality (AR) will be pivotal in 
crafting interactive storylines and engaging visitors through gamified learning pathways. 
Additionally, audio commentaries will enhance accessibility, offering content in simplified 
language or as audio descriptions, and computer games will provide interactive learning 
experiences, all underpinned by insights from comprehensive literature reviews. 
3. Prototyping: the teams will be asked to produce semi-working prototypes that can be tasted with 
actual users. For that matter, replicas will be produced using 3D scanning and 3D printing, audio 
files will be recorded, and primary code will be written. All groups will face the same questions 
regarding interaction design, and each of them will choose to solve them differently. 
4. Testing Evaluating: For the initial usability test, students will employ the Wizard of Oz testing 
technique—an approach used to evaluate a system that is still in development, proven to be highly 
effective in assessing interactions and performance [22]. While 3D artifacts and audio files will be 
generated, the activation of interactive artifacts will be overseen by a "hidden wizard". Students 
may test these concepts with individuals with cognitive impairments, even if they are not fully 
functional, and incorporate enhancements into the final projects. 
The final prototypes will be developed and refined according to the observations of the intermediate 
tests. It will be presented at the end of the course.  
4.      Expected Contribution  
When reviewing the literature in the context of making museums more accessible for visitors with 
cognitive impairment, the effort focuses on simplified text, social stories, and guidelines for accessible 
materials [11][17]. The aim of this project is to train a multidisciplinary team of students (developers 
to be) to design and develop an accessible smart/intelligent environment for cognitively impaired 
visitors by exploring the potential of advanced technologies using the UCD approach, universal design, 
and co-design approach. These approaches involve collaboration between students and lecturers with 
expertise in technological experience and background, and those with therapy experience and 
background.  
Such a course offers a unique opportunity to test, evaluate and compare the performance and 
satisfaction from the interaction with various prototypes. Although these prototypes are similar 
enough in terms of the amount and type of information, they differ in interaction and manipulation 
methods. Such an opportunity is not common, and the ability to compare different elements of the 
same interactions with the same participants can lead to a better understanding of visitors' needs and 
expectations. The insights gained from these comparisons can inform the development of more 
accurate guidelines to improve information accessibility for this audience within museums.  
Additionally, the course has the potential to significantly contribute to the field of accessible design 
and human-computer interaction devices and interfaces. By providing valuable insights into the design 
and development of technological solutions for visitors with cognitive impairment, the course offers 
essential insights into designing and developing more inclusive user interfaces and devices. 
Furthermore, the knowledge and skills acquired by the graduate students during this course will be 
invaluable in their future endeavors, equipping them to tackle challenges in accessible design and 
enhance the inclusivity of digital and physical spaces alike. 

References 
[1] Abascal, J., & Azevedo, L. (2007). Fundamentals of inclusive HCI design. In Universal Acess in 
Human Computer Interaction. Coping with Diversity: 4th International Conference on Universal 
Access in Human-Computer Interaction, UAHCI 2007, Held as Part of HCI International 2007, 
Beijing, China, July 22-27, 2007, Proceedings, Part I 4 (pp. 3-9). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.  
[2] Avni, Y., Danial-Saad A., and Kuflik, T. (2023). Exploring the potential of enriching museum visit 
experience of blind visitors using advanced technologies. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 3622, 33-
40. 
[3] Bienvenu, B. Museums and ADA@25: Progress and looking ahead. Museum, 94(5), pp. 29-34. 
(2015). 
[4] Borg, J., Lindstrom, A., Larsen, S.: “Assistive technology in developing countries: a review from 
the perspective of the convention on the rights of persons with disabilities”, Prosthetics and 
Orthotics International, Vol. 35No. 1, pp. 20-29, (2011). 
[5] Braden, C.: Welcoming all visitors: Museums, accessibility, and visitors with disabilities. University 
of Michigan Working Papers in Museum Studies (2016). 
[6] Cavazos Quero, L., Iranzo Bartolomé, J., Lee, S., Han, E., Kim, S., & Cho, J. (2018, October). An 
interactive multimodal guide to improve art accessibility for blind people. In Proceedings of the 
20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (pp. 346-348). 
[7] Cook, A. M., and Miller-Polgar, J. (2012). Essentials of assistive technology. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier. 
[8] Danial-Saad, A., Weiss, P.L., and Schreuer, N. (2012). Assessment of Computer Task Performance 
(ACTP) of Children and Youth with Intellectual and Developmental Disability. Disability & 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 7(6), 450-458. doi: 10.3109/17483107 
[9] Frank, M., Lavy, I., & Elata, D. (2003). Implementing the project-based learning approach in an 
academic engineering course. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 13, 273-
288.  
[10] Garcia Carrizosa, H., Sheehy, K., Rix, J., Seale, J., Hayhoe, S.: Designing technologies for museums: 
accessibility and participation issues. Journal of enabling technologies, 14(1), pp. 31-39, (2020). 
[11] Guedes L. S., Zanardi I., Mastrogiuseppe M., Span S., and Landoni, M.: Co-designing a Museum 
Application with People with Intellectual Disabilities: Findings and Accessible Redesign. In 
Proceedings of the European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics 2023, pp. 1-8, (2023). 
[12] Hillemann, 
P. 
(2016). 
Art 
Museum 
Tours 
For 
Visitors 
Who 
Are 
Blind. 
https://americanart.si.edu/blog/eye-level/2016/09/317/art-museum-tours-visitors-who-are-
blind 
[13] Horton, E. L., Renganathan, R., Toth, B. N., Cohen, A. J., Bajcsy, A. V., Bateman, A., Jennings, M. 
C., Khattar, A., Kuo, R. S., Lee, F. A., Lim, M. K., Migasiuk, L. W., Zhang, A., Zhao, O. K., & Oliveira, 
M. A. (2017). A review of principles in design and usability testing of tactile technology for 
individuals 
with 
visual 
impairments. 
Assistive 
Technology, 
29(1), 
pp. 
28–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2016.1176083 
[14] Islek, D. The Future of Accessible Museums: Qualitative Analysis on Educational Practices. Revista 
Românească pentru Educaţie Multidimensională, 15(1), pp. 83-106, (2023).  
[15] Luiza, S. M.: Accessible tourism–the ignored opportunity. Annals of Faculty of Economics, 1(2), 
pp. 1154-1157, (2010). 
[16] Mao, J.-Y., Vredenburg, K., Smith, P. W., & Carey, T. (2005). The state of user-centered design 
practice. COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, 48(3). 
[17] Mastrogiuseppe, M., Span, S. and Bortolotti, E.: Improving accessibility to cultural heritage for 
people with Intellectual Disabilities: A tool for observing the obstacles and facilitators for the 
access to knowledge. Alter, 15(2), pp. 113-123, (2021). 
[18] Newell, A. F. and Gregor, P. (2000). 'User sensitive inclusive design'—in search of a new paradigm. 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Universal Usability (CUU '00). NewYork: ACM Press, pp. 
39-44.  

[19] Nielsen, J. (1993). Usability Engineering. London, England: Academic Press. 
[20] Norman, D. A., & Draper, S. W. (1986). User centered system design; new perspectives on human-
computer interaction. L. Erlbaum Associates Inc. https://doi.org/10.1201/b15703 
[21] Packer, J. Beyond learning: Exploring visitors' perceptions of the value and benefits of museum 
experiences. Curator: The Museum Journal, 51(1), pp. 33-54, (2008). 
[22] Salber, D., and Coutaz, J. (1993). Applying the Wizard of Oz technique to the study of multimodal 
systems. In L. J. Bass, J. Gornostaev, & C. Unger (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction (Vol. 753, 
pp. 219–230). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-57433-6_51  
[23] Salmen, J. P. (1998). Everyone's Welcome: The Americans with Disabilities Act and Museums. 
American Association of Museums, 1575 Eye St., NW., Suite 400, Washington, DC 20005.  
[24] Sanders, E. B.-N., & Stappers, P. J. (2008). Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. 
CoDesign, 4(1), 5–18. https:// doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875068 
[25] Scherer, M. J. (2005). Matching Person & Technology Assessment Process. Institute for Matching 
Person and Technology, Inc. http://members. aol. com/IMPT97/mptdesc. html.  
[26] Shneiderman, B. and Plaisant, C: Designing the User Interface Strategies for Effective Human-
Computer Interaction fourth edition. Addison Wesley Longman, Inc., (2005). 
[27] Smithsonian Accessibility Program (2011). Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible Exhibition 
Design, Washington: Smithsonian Accessibility Program. 
[28] Stephanidis, C., Akoumianakis, D., Sfyrakis, M., & Paramythis, A. (1998). Universal accessibility in 
HCI: Process-oriented design guidelines and tool requirements. In Proceedings of the 4th ERCIM 
Workshop on User Interfaces for all, Stockholm, Sweden (pp. 19-21).  
[29] Umanski, D., and Avni, Y. (2017). PLAY-ABLE: developing ability-based play activities for children 
with special needs. In Proceedings of the 11th International Convention on Rehabilitation 
Engineering and Assistive Technology (pp. 1-4). 
[30] Vredenburg, K., Mao, J.-Y., Smith, P. W., & Carey, T. (2002). A Survey of User-Centered Design 
Practice. 1.  
[31] Wood, E. (Ed.). A New Role for Museum Educators: Purpose, Approach, and Mindset. Taylor & 
Francis, (2023). 

