Breaking barriers: designing technologies to enhance 
museum experiences for individuals with mobility 
disabilities 
Julia Sheidin1 and Tsvi Kuflik2 
1 Braude College of Engineering Karmiel, 51 Snunit St., P.O. Box 78, Karmiel 21982, Israel 
2 The University of Haifa, Abba Khoushy Ave 199, Haifa, 3498838, Israel 
Abstract 
Accessibility gains importance and is becoming a central component on the agenda of cultural and 
heritage sites, such as museums, especially since the ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. A range of innovative technologies are being designed to facilitate accessibility 
for museum visitors. These new technologies have the potential to transform museum experiences for 
people with mobility disabilities. The presented work is a work in progress, which demonstrates an 
innovative technique for designing adaptive museum displays. We present our idea in the context of the 
two types of display cases: free-standing and wall-hung. 
Keywords  
Cultural heritage experience, Adaptive design, Inclusive design, Museum experience, Human-centered 
computing, Accessibility, Accessibility systems and tools 1 
1. Introduction 
In recent years, there has been an increasing recognition in cultural and heritage sites, such as 
museums, of the need to cater for diversity within their audiences. More recently this importance 
has been acknowledged and explicitly focused for people who may require support to access and 
enjoy these sites. As exhibitions are transitioning from the more traditional “presenter of objects” 
to being “a site for experiences” and adding different forms of technology to achieve those ends, 
Inclusive Design becomes more critical [15]. The term inclusive suggests that no one should be 
excluded from experiencing the benefits of the museum, in other words that the whole world— 
and every citizen in it—should be involved and able to see its exhibitions [11, 26]. The importance 
of this issue is reflected in The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities [25], 
which argues that assistive and digital technologies have a central role in the lives of people with 
disabilities and therefore requires that national government address the assistive technology 
needs of their citizens [1].   
Therefore, the museums, that play such an important role in society, are trying to be more 
responsive to visitors’ varied needs, including for people with mobility, hearing, visual, and 
cognitive or developmental disabilities [2, 7]. Technology becomes able to create a more 
authentic experience, potentially bringing the user closer to previously inaccessible artifacts and 
sites, enabling them to function independently and with equity and dignity [9, 12, 13].   
Developing technological solutions for people with disabilities requires different approaches, 
according to the type of disability, since there are many different forms of disability or specific 
conditions that may impact the way people face museum activities [11, 21]. Poria et al. [18], 
provided a study that focused on the obstacles and barriers participants with disabilities (people 
who use wheelchairs or crutches and visually impaired people) face while visiting art museums. 
 
AMID 2023 - Workshop on Accessibility and Multimodal Interaction Design Approaches in Museums for People with 
Impairments, September 27, 2023, Athens, Greece  
 julia@braude.ac.il (J. Sheidin); tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il (T. Kuflik)  
 0009-0002-9092-7231 (J. Sheidin); 0000-0003-0096-4240 (T. Kuflik) 
 
© 2023 Copyright for this paper by its authors. 
Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).  
 CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)  
 
CEUR
Workshop
Proceedings
ceur-ws.org
ISSN 1613-0073

In-depth interviews revealed that people with disabilities are not able to experience the 
museums as they wish, despite museums’ efforts toward becoming accessible to all. According to 
their findings, the difficulties the visitors face are divided into two sections: those encountered 
outside the exhibition (such as physical obstacles on the way to and from the museum) and those 
experienced within the exhibition itself. Within the exhibition, difficulties are related to the public 
space within the museum, including issues like counter heights (at the cashier, information desk, 
earphone-rental station, and shops), as well as obstacles posed by the exhibits themselves [18].   
Therefore, in our current work, we decided to concentrate on the specific needs of mobility 
disability at the museum itself. There may be observable signs that a museum visitor has a 
physical disability, such as use of a cane, crutches, or wheelchair. In this context, features such as 
ramps, lifts, and elevators provide greater accessibility. So do less apparent accommodations like 
positioning exhibit descriptions at a seated person's eye level, paving a gravel trail, or installing 
a power door opener. The least obvious accommodation, however considered as the most 
common issue, is the positioning of the exhibit objects themselves, especially the height of the 
exhibits displayed [18]. Typically, visual items in exhibitions (e.g., artifact, graphic, prop) are 
displayed within cases, either free-standing or wall-hung. Those cases should be allowed to be 
viewed by people who use wheelchairs as well as people that are standing, be they short or tall. 
Therefore, they should be designed at the appropriate height and have a clear floor space to stand 
next to it and allowing other visitors, with disabilities and without, to pass by (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1: The ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) Standards state for positioning 
Freestanding display cases [23] 
 
The current paper presents a novel technique for designing free-standing and hung displays. 
Our objective was to suggest ideas for techniques that may be used for creating exhibitions that 
can be experienced from a seated position, and at the same time be capable of accommodating a 
range of standing visitors. The rest of the paper is described as follows. We first provide a 
description of related work; we then present the suggested solution, followed by conclusions and 
future work directions. 
2. Background And Related Work   
Museums are progressively acknowledging the importance of addressing the diverse needs and 
expectations of their audiences. The types of adjustments for individuals with mobility limitations 
tend to be the most thought about by museums and the most closely aligned with the ADA 

requirements [20]. The epidemiological COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the retrograde state of 
culture in terms of accessibility and usability, conditioned by the physical and web browsing 
limitations that for years impacted people with disabilities [17]. This health crisis gave the 
opportunity to develop more inclusive and accessible actions, adapted to the whole society [16]. 
The different cultural spaces, including museums, had to reinvent themselves to remain alive and 
accessible to citizens [11]. Therefore, we will assess the existing solutions both before and after 
the COVID-19 pandemic.   
Before COVID-19, the available options for individuals with mobility limitations primarily 
consisted of wheelchairs (standard and smart), motorized scooters, ramps, elevators and 
accessible seating areas in auditoriums and theaters. Similarly, museums have also started 
placing increased emphasis on physical accessibility by ensuring wheelchair access to physical 
spaces [2].   
Many museums facilitate universal access to their collections via multimedia and portable 
guides, making access available to all and enriching the visitor’s experience [27]. There are 
numerous multimedia tourist guides in existence, however, only an insufficient number take 
accessibility criteria into consideration. For example, the Louvre Museum’s multimedia guide, 
which integrates sign language and takes into consideration people with reduced mobility and 
includes a route for wheelchair-bound visitors [22].   
Some museums have also created ways to help people view exhibit areas or buildings that are 
not fully accessible. For example, a virtual tour created by the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum 
in New York City that is available on its website shows photographs and 360-degree panoramic 
views of inaccessible areas of its ship [2].   
Another offering that some museums have for individuals with mobility limitations is an 
accessible map (e.g., Wheelmap2) that enables the collaborative creation of accessibility maps to 
augment standard maps with accessibility information [4]. For example, maps at Colonial 
Williamsburg and Old Sturbridge Village show buildings that are fully accessible, not accessible, 
or have limits to accessibility [2, 12]. These applications usually provide information about 
locations that support disabled facilities, and which do not, and share their opinion about each 
location. This approach is followed by AXSMap3, a crowd sourced map, powered by Google Maps, 
that stores and shares information about wheelchair-accessible facilities in public places such as 
restaurants, hotels, etc. [6].   
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact on museums, bringing about significant 
changes and presenting them with various challenges [5]. Virtual tours have become more 
popular in association with museums [19]. Digital initiatives in museums, and in particular the 
use of social media by museums, have increased during the pandemic [3]. The health crisis has 
expedited the progress of technological advancements in the cultural and heritage sectors, 
particularly in creating accessible and satisfactory services for individuals with diverse 
disabilities [10]. For in-stance, 3D reconstructions and virtual tours could allow people with 
permanent or temporary mobility impairment to visit unreachable places [19]; Virtual reality 
(VR) and Augmented reality (AR) systems enable the rediscovery of the ancient wonders or 
ruined sites using 3D models [24]; open data tools enable the archiving of data and 
interoperability between ancient manuscripts and images [8].   
Still, remote access using technology is not a replacement of an on-site visit. In this respect, 
not all platforms or cultural sites themselves are accessible and inclusive for people with different 
types of disabilities [17]. For instance, we are not aware of any research or industrial work that 
has provided adaptable display cases or adaptable exhibitions. Therefore, our work fills this gap 
by suggesting a new approach to accessing today's static display exhibitions.   
3. Method  
 
2 https://wheelmap.org/  
3 https://www.axsmap.com/  

The greatest challenge for exhibition designers is offering engaging experiences for as many 
people as possible, catering to different abilities, interests, and preferences. Technology becomes 
able to reach the requirements which mediate user’s experience. This helps create a more 
authentic experience, potentially bringing the user closer to previously inaccessible artifacts and 
sites [9].  
When considering positioning objects in an exhibition (e.g., artifact, graphic, prop), it is very 
important to pay careful attention to how objects are displayed with-in cases, how labels are used, 
how lighting is designed, and how the information is delivered [23]. Items are usually displayed 
within cases, either free-standing or wall-hung. Those cases should be allowed to be viewed by 
people who use wheelchairs as well as those that are standing, be they short or tall. Therefore, 
they should be designed following the ADA Standards, Smithsonian Guidelines for Accessible 
Design and other accessibility guides, that were analyzed to identify the basic concepts and 
requirements for universal design [14, 23]. More specifically, there is need to take into 
consideration two main features [14]:  
1. 
Item’s Height from Ground: the distance between the ground and the item’s centroid, i.e., 
how high the item is placed on the wall. Following specific guidelines pertaining to item visual 
accessibility, small items (to center line) should be placed at no higher than 1015 mm (40 in.) 
above the floor.  
2. 
The Top of Viewing Surface: the distance between the ground and the top of the display 
case. Following specific guidelines pertaining to item visual accessibility, the top of a case 
should be constructed at a maximum of 915 mm (36 in.) above the finished floor for items that 
are mounted flat on a pedestal or deck.  
This is where we come into the picture with our contribution in this area of research, the 
innovative technique for designing adaptive museum displays. We present our idea in context of 
the two types of display cases: free-standing and wall-hung.  
3.1. Free-standing display cases  
The eye level for people seated in wheelchairs or in scooters ranges from 42inches for a young 
person between the ages of 9 and 12 to 51 inches for a tall male. This tells us that items laid flat 
in display cases at 44 inches, such as books and labels, are too high for many if not most visitors 
using wheelchairs. A preferable maximum height would be 33 to 40 inches above the floor (see 
Figure 2.1).  
To enhance the enjoyment of visitors with limited mobility, it is proposed to re-place large 
free-standing display cases with shallower ones (potentially regular display cases that their 
height may be adapted dynamically and even automatically). To achieve this, a mechanical 
mechanism will be incorporated into the legs of the cabinets, allowing for adjustable height 
settings that can be lowered or lifted according to the desired level. The activation of the 
mechanism will involve pressing height control buttons, with one button designated for lowering 
the case and another for raising it. This modification would offer improved accessibility and 
accommodate the needs of a broader range of visitors.  
 
Figure 2.1: Height of free-standing display 
case [14]. 
 
 
Figure 2.2: Average viewing sightlines [14]. 

3.2. Wall-hung display cases  
A male adult who uses a wheelchair has an average eye level of between 1090 mm (43 in.) and 
1295 mm (51 in.) above the finished floor (see Figure 2.2). Objects placed above 1015 mm (40 
in.) will be seen only from below by most seated and short viewers. Therefore, in this scenario, 
the suggested solution involves integrating a small engine that can effortlessly lower the 
wallhung display to the desired height. This implementation would facilitate accessibility and 
provide visitors with the ability to adjust the display to their preferred viewing level.  
A similar approach can be applied in the art wings of museums, such as the Hecht Museum at 
the University of Haifa, where paintings are currently hung using wires. In this case, adding an 
engine would be a straightforward extension, that will improve the experience for wheelchair 
users or visitors of varying heights, whether they are standing or seated. The suggested by us 
system is designed to identify the visitor positioned in front of the artwork and measure their eye 
level. Subsequently, it will calculate the optimal delta value, that should be made to raise or lower 
the exhibit. The calculated delta value, along with the specified direction (either upward or 
downward), will then be transmitted to the engine to facilitate the precise repositioning of the 
artwork. This modification would enable effortless adjustment of the painting's height, ensuring 
optimal visibility and engagement for all individuals (see Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3: Adjustment of the painting's height in the art wing at Hecht Museum. 
4. Conclusions and future work  
The presented work is a work in progress demonstrating innovative techniques for designing adaptable 
display cases and exhibitions. We firmly believe the that the implementation of modified or even 
adaptable cabinets, along with adjustable art exhibitions that can be experienced from a seated position, 
may have the potential to greatly enhance the cultural visit experience for all visitors. This includes 
individuals in wheelchairs, as well as those who are short and tall. To further gauge the potential impact, 
we are planning to provide an initial prototype, demonstrate it to the museum and conduct evaluation 
with end users. This will help us estimate the effectiveness and viability of the proposed solution.  
References 
[1] M Borg, J., Lindstrom, A., Larsen, S.: “Assistive technology in developing countries: a review 
from the perspective of the convention on the rights of persons with disabilities”, Prosthetics 
and Orthotics International, Vol. 35No. 1, pp. 20-29, (2011).  

[2] Braden, C.: Welcoming all visitors: Museums, accessibility, and visitors with disabilities. 
University of Michigan Working Papers in Museum Studies, i. (2016).  
[3] Burke, V., Jørgensen, D., Jørgensen, F. A.: Museums at home: Digital initiatives in response to 
COVID-19. Norsk museumstidsskrift, 6(2), pp. 117-123, (2020).   
[4] Cardonha, C., Gallo, D., Avegliano, P., Herrmann, R., Koch, F., Borger, S.: A crowdsourcing 
platform for the construction of accessibility maps. In Proceedings of the 10th international 
cross-disciplinary conference on web accessibility, pp. 1-4, (2013).  
[5] Choi, B., Kim, J.: Changes and challenges in museum management after the COVID-19 
pandemic. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 7(2), pp. 148, 
(2021).   
[6] DaSilva, J., Cook, A.: AXS map, http://www.axsma p.com/. Retrieved 13 Feb 2017, (2015).  
[7] Demirezen, B.: A literature review on the availability of augmented reality and virtual reality 
technology in the tourism sector. International Journal of Global Tourism Research, 3(1), pp. 
1-26, (2019).   
[8] Díaz, J. L. P., Dorn, A., Koch, G., Abgaz, Y.: A comparative approach between different computer 
vision tools, including commercial and open-source, for improving cultural image access and 
analysis. In 2020 10th International Conference on Advanced Computer Information 
Technologies (ACIT), pp. 815-819. IEEE, (2020).  
[9] Garcia Carrizosa, H., Sheehy, K., Rix, J., Seale, J., Hayhoe, S.: Designing technologies for 
museums: accessibility and participation issues. Journal of enabling technologies, 14(1), pp. 
31-39, (2020).  
[10] Giannini, T., Bowen, J. P.: Museums and Digital Culture: From reality to digitality in the age of 
COVID-19. Heritage, 5(1), pp. 192-214, (2022).  
[11] González-Herrera, A. I., Díaz-Herrera, A. B., Hernández-Dionis, P., Pérez-Jorge, D.: Educational 
and accessible museums and cultural spaces. Humanities and Social Sciences 
Communications, 10(1), pp. 1-8, (2023).  
[12] Islek, D.: The Future of Accessible Museums: Qualitative Analysis on Educational Practices. 
Revista Românească pentru Educaţie Multidimensională, 15(1), pp. 83-106, (2023).    
[13] Luiza, S. M.: Accessible tourism–the ignored opportunity. Annals of Faculty of Economics, 
1(2), pp. 1154-1157, (2010).  
[14] Majewski, J.: Smithsonian guidelines for accessible exhibition design. Smithsonian 
Accessibility Program, pp. 1-60, (1996).  
[15] Packer, J.: Beyond learning: Exploring visitors' perceptions of the value and benefits of 
museum experiences. Curator: The Museum Journal, 51(1), pp. 33-54, (2008).  
[16] Pérez-Jorge, D., Rodríguez-Jiménez, M. D. C., Ariño-Mateo, E., Barragán-Medero, F.: The effect 
of COVID-19 in university tutoring models. Sustainability, 12(20), pp. 8631, (2020).   
[17] Pirrone, M., Centorrino, M., Galletta, A., Sicari, C., Villari, M.: Digital Humanities and disability: 
A systematic literature review of cultural accessibility for people with disability. Digital 
Scholarship in the Humanities, 38(1), pp. 313-329, (2023).  
[18] Poria, Y., Reichel, A., Brandt, Y.: People with disabilities visit art museums: an exploratory 
study of obstacles and difficulties. Journal of Heritage Tourism, 4(2), pp. 117-129, (2009).  
[19] Resta, G., Dicuonzo, F., Karacan, E., Pastore, D.: The impact of virtual tours on museum 
exhibitions after the onset of covid-19 restrictions: visitor engagement and long-term 
perspectives. SCIRES-IT-SCIentific RESearch and Information Technology, 11(1), pp. 
151166, (2021).   
[20] Reyes-García, M. E., Criado-García, F., Camúñez-Ruíz, J. A., Casado-Pérez, M.: Accessibility to 
cultural tourism: The case of the major museums in the city of Seville. Sustainability, 13(6), 
pp. 3432, (2021).   
[21] Ribeiro, F. R., Silva, A., Barbosa, F., Silva, A. P., Metrôlho, J. C.: Mobile applications for 
accessible tourism: overview, challenges and a proposed platform. Information Technology 
& Tourism, 19, pp. 29-59, (2018).   
[22] Ruiz, B., Pajares, J. L., Utray, F., Moreno, L.: Design for All in multimedia guides for museums. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 27(4), pp. 1408-1415, (2011).  

[23] Salmen, J. P.: Everyone's Welcome: The Americans with Disabilities Act and Museums. 
American Association of Museums, 1575 Eye St., NW., Suite 400, Washington, DC 20005, 
(1998).  
[24] Silva, M., Teixeira, L.: Developing an extended reality platform for immersive and interactive 
experiences for cultural heritage: Serralves museum and coa archeologic park. In 2020 IEEE 
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), pp. 
300-302. IEEE, (2020).   
[25] United Nations (2006), “Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities”, available at: 
www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml  
[26] Wintzerith, S.: “Inclusive without Knowing It.” In The New Museum Community: Audiences, 
Challenges, Benefits, edited by Nicola Abery, pp. 458–76. Edinburgh: MuseumsEtc, (2013).  
[27] Yang, N., Sun, X., Jin, S.: Design and development of digital painting online learning and 
communication system based on visual semantics. In 2020 International Conference on 
Advance in Ambient Computing and Intelligence (ICAACI), pp. 161-164. IEEE. (2020). 

