Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-023-00983-2
LONG PAPER
Interactive description to enhance accessibility and experience of deaf 
and hard‑of‑hearing individuals in museums
JooYeong Kim1 · ChungHa Lee1 · JuYeon Kim1 · Jin‑Hyuk Hong1,2
Accepted: 16 February 2023 / Published online: 1 March 2023 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
Text descriptions in museums provide detailed and rich information about artifacts that broadens museum visitors’ knowl-
edge and enriches their experience. However, since deaf and hard-of-hearing (DHH) individuals have low literacy compared 
to hearing people and communicate through sign language, museum descriptions are considerably limited in delivering a 
stimulating and informative environment for understanding and enjoying exhibits. To improve DHH individuals’ museum 
experience, we investigated the potential of three interactive description prototypes: active-linked, graph-based, and chatbot-
based. A comparative study with 20 DHH participants confirmed that our interaction-based prototypes improve information 
accessibility and provide an enhanced experience compared to conventional museum descriptions. Most participants preferred 
the graph-based prototype, while post-interviews suggested that each prototype has potential benefits and limitations accord-
ing to DHH individuals’ particular literacy skills and preferences. Text descriptions can be enlivened for DHH visitors by 
adding a simple interaction functionality, e.g., clicking, which can lead to a better museum experience.
Keywords  Museum description · Deaf and hard-of-hearing individuals · Interaction design · Museum experience · 
Information accessibility
1  Introduction
Museum descriptions (or text) are the most basic means for 
visitors to access information about various exhibits and 
serve as a medium that allows for interaction between a 
visitor and an object [18, 41]. A typical museum descrip-
tion consists of a text supplemented with images or videos. 
Ranging from simple stories to historical and scientific facts, 
museum descriptions provide a variety of information on 
each artifact, often including difficult or professional terms 
[28]. Although these may be unfamiliar to the average per-
son, visitors can learn new terms by considering the overall 
context of descriptions and drawing from their prior knowl-
edge; consequently, museum descriptions expand our under-
standing of exhibits and allow for a rich museum experience 
[23, 46].
Text descriptions play an important role in shaping visi-
tors’ museum experience as they offer detailed explanations 
about artifacts. Thus, it is essential that the information be 
presented in a way that is accessible to all visitors. Unfortu-
nately, although museums strive to provide all patrons the 
same access to rich information and opportunities to expand 
their knowledge, the current format of museum descriptions 
considerably limits the museum experience of deaf and hard-
of-hearing (DHH) visitors. One of the main challenges DHH 
visitors face when encountering text descriptions is diffi-
culty reading the text. Generally speaking, they have lower 
literacy skills than hearing people [15, 16, 33], including 
problems with reading and understanding text due to unfa-
miliar syntactic structures or limited vocabulary skills [4, 13, 
14, 31]. Due to reading difficulties, many DHH individuals 
simply visually observe the object or skim descriptions to 
get a vague idea rather than grasping in-depth information 
 *	 Jin‑Hyuk Hong 
	
jh7.hong@gist.ac.kr
	
JooYeong Kim 
	
jspirit01@gm.gist.ac.kr
	
ChungHa Lee 
	
chunghalee@gm.gist.ac.kr
	
JuYeon Kim 
	
kimjuyeon@gm.gist.ac.kr
1	
School of Integrated Technology, Gwangju Institute 
of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea
2	
AI Graduate School, Gwangju Institute of Science 
and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea

914
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
or the full back-story contained in museum descriptions; as 
a result, their museum experience is confined to a limited or 
shallow level of understanding.
Recently, museums have tried to improve information 
accessibility for DHH visitors by providing sign language 
content on digital devices [12, 20, 32, 34, 35, 42], where 
there exist some issues in exploiting sign language alone. 
First, cognitive load may occur due to simultaneity [36]. 
Sign language users who consume all information visually 
may experience cognitive load due to visual dispersion when 
understanding descriptions [10]. They must often quickly 
switch their visual attention between an artifact and sign lan-
guage while understanding content, which may cause visual 
dispersion or the omission of some information. Second, 
sign language content is usually not only costly to produce 
due to insufficient data [8, 7], but also summarized compared 
to the original content, so it may not be able to convey the 
same level of rich information that textual descriptions pro-
vide (e.g., acquisition of new terms and a detailed account 
of artifacts). Moreover, such content is passively provided 
in a one-way manner, highlighting the need to more actively 
satisfy the curiosity of DHH visitors inside the museum, 
e.g., answering any questions they may have on the artifacts 
[5]. Given that DHH Individuals can use different languages 
besides sign language [21], museum descriptions need to be 
studied in various options including text format so that DHH 
individuals can choose [2]. Thus, there is a need to improve 
the current textual descriptions to ensure that rich informa-
tion is provided—even to visitors who have difficulty in 
understanding texts like DHH visitors. However, to the best 
of our knowledge, few studies have explored the efficacy, 
limitations, or potentials of textual descriptions in museums.
To provide better accessibility and improve DHH individ-
uals’ experience, we have investigated the potential of inter-
active museum descriptions that allow people to actively 
interact with a description system and explore all there is 
to know about an artifact. After identifying three issues 
that DHH individuals with low literacy skill encounter in 
museum descriptions (exploration, construction, and user-
inquiry), we propose three interactive museum descriptions: 
active-linked, graph-based, and chatbot-based prototypes. 
A comparative study and post-interviews with 20 DHH 
participants revealed that even textual descriptions, which 
are most familiar to hearing individuals, could be improved 
by incorporating some interactive design elements. The 
potential and limitations of the prototypes are presented to 
explore the ways in which the interactive museum descrip-
tions could improve the experience of DHH individuals, who 
have unique needs and preferences.
2  Background work
DHH individuals vary greatly in terms of their communi-
cation preferences [16] and reading comprehension ability 
[15, 47, 50]. Based on educational and cultural factors 
[50], some DHH individuals are adept readers, but others 
are not good at reading in general [17]. DHH adults usu-
ally report average reading scores between the fifth- and 
sixth-grade levels [15], which falls well below the stand-
ard scores of hearing adults [9]. Many DHH individuals 
still struggle in comprehending “text” through reading. 
This presents important challenges, especially in an area 
where obtaining information by reading is important [16]: 
museum descriptions.
Museum visitors frequently refer to text descriptions to 
acquire detailed information about artifacts, artworks, etc. 
As basic museum descriptions are mostly textual in for-
mat, this creates a comprehension barrier for many DHH 
visitors. In an attempt to address this issue, the Smith-
sonian Museum published ‘accessible design guidelines’ 
[45], which highlight that museums must limit sentence 
length and avoid complex English in text descriptions to 
facilitate DHH individuals’ understanding. Unfortunately, 
most museum descriptions are designed by and for people 
who use both spoken and written language; thus, the issue 
of DHH individuals’ information accessibility to museum 
descriptions persists [20].
When providing textual information to DHH individu-
als, there are some important considerations to be made. 
Dostal et al. presented two principles: (1) Optimize Access 
and (2) Make Content and Thinking Visible [16]. Optimize 
Access focuses on facilitating communication by inquiring 
about communication preferences, and Make Content and 
Thinking Visible underscores that making information vis-
ible applies to thinking visible. Inui et al. discovered that 
offering a syntactic and lexical paraphrase of a given text 
to DHH individuals could support their reading compre-
hension [24], implying that offering sufficient varieties of 
leveled text improves their reading ability.
Numerous other works have studied tools that can boost 
DHH individuals’ reading comprehension [1, 2, 3, 6, 25, 
27, 29]. Alonzo et al. examined the benefits of automatic 
text simplification (ATS) for DHH individuals and found 
that they perceived benefits from and preferred a system 
with on-demand lexical simplification [2]. Kushalnagar 
et al. simplified cancer and health-related texts using 
MOSES, a text simplification program, and confirmed 
the benefit of text simplification through an experiment 
on 36 DHH students [29]. Gennari and Mich evaluated 
whether another text simplification tool (LODE) could 
improve DHH children’s reading comprehension and 
found that appropriate illustrations make the text easier 

915
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926	
1 3
to understand; by enriching the stories with static and/or 
animated drawings, they significantly improve text read-
ability [19]. Chung et al. proposed a news display system 
for DHH individuals that automatically converts complex 
sentences in a given news article into simple sentences and 
illustrates the relationships among them via a graphical 
representation. Their research demonstrated the potential 
of (1) Identifying subordinate and embedded clauses in 
complex sentences, (2) Relocating them for better read-
ability, and (3) Displaying the clauses’ relationships with 
a graphical representation, which subsequently allowed 
readers to have a better understanding of the text [11].
Although reading text remains a challenge for DHH 
individuals with low literacy skills, these studies showed 
that text accessibility can be improved by determining how 
to adapt its presentation, suggesting museum descriptions 
can also be improved in this regard. With this context, we 
explore three research questions in this study:
•	 RQ1: What difficulties do DHH individuals have when 
they encounter textual descriptions in museums?
•	 RQ2: Does the interaction help DHH individuals have a 
better experience with museum descriptions?
•	 RQ3: What are the potential and limitations of interactive 
museum descriptions?
3  Methods
3.1  Prototypes
Based on prior studies for DHH individuals [2, 3, 1, 4, 5, 
12, 14, 20, 30, 35, 22, 49], we focused on three issues DHH 
individuals may face when they encounter textual descrip-
tions of museum artifacts:
•	 Exploration DHH individuals want to explore more infor-
mation in addition to the basic description of an artifact. 
Many studies have shown that deaf people report a more 
positive museum experience when they can explore and 
interact with more information on their own [5, 12, 20, 
30, 35]. Accordingly, providing supplemental visual 
materials and explanations, e.g., definitions, examples, 
and related stories, would be helpful for their understand-
ing and exploration [22, 49];
•	 Construction DHH individuals often have difficulty 
understanding complex and long sentences due to low 
literacy skills [21]. Prior research has revealed that the 
main factors of poor comprehension are syntactic struc-
ture and difficult vocabulary [2, 1, 3, 4, 14]. Museum 
descriptions are generally composed of complex syntac-
tic structures and unfamiliar terminology; thus, their for-
mat may be unsuitable to effectively convey information 
to DHH individuals who have not skilled at reading;
•	 User-inquiry DHH individuals want to ask questions 
and receive adequate feedback when they become curi-
ous about an artifact in the course of a museum tour [5, 
20], but sign language interpreters, who explain exhibits 
to DHH people and facilitate communication between 
hearing people (e.g., curators) and DHH visitors, are not 
always available in museums [5].
Taking the above issues into account, we prototyped four 
description styles to explain artifacts in museums as shown 
in Fig. 1: common, active-linked, graph-based, and chatbot-
based styles. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the 
four prototypes described in what follows:
•	 Common prototype As a baseline, the common prototype 
provides conventional descriptions commonly available 
in museums; the description consists of many complete 
sentences;
•	 Active-linked prototype Researchers found that on-
demand text buttons like pop-ups (text boxes appear 
above the words when hovering the mouse) help reading 
understanding rather than unconditionally replacing com-
plex museum descriptions with a simplified version [2]. 
Referred to these works, the active-linked prototype is an 
improved version of the common prototype that allows 
users to explore information up to one additional level 
depth (shallow exploration). In the active-linked proto-
type, some difficult or professional words, e.g., “maguri” 
and “reverse inlay technique,” are color-highlighted so 
that additional information pops up when users click the 
colored words. Strategic highlighting of words or phrases 
can enhance the reading experience of DHH [26];
•	 Graph-based prototype As a prototype of a simplified 
construction rather long sentences, we adopted the 
“knowledge graph.” Knowledge graph presents related 
information in a hierarchical connection [43] and can 
reduce the need to read the entire descriptions [44]. We 
refer to the third prototype as graph-based, where the 
keywords (nodes) are hierarchically connected to each 
other. In terms of construction, it initially displays only 
several keyword nodes instead of presenting all descrip-
tive sentences at once. It can then be expanded with more 
details if users click on the nodes (keypoint-based con-
struction). Unlike the active-linked prototype’s single-
level exploration, the graph-based prototype enables 
a deeper level of exploration by progressively expand-
ing the graph according to users’ interests (progressive 

916
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
exploration). We implemented the graph-based prototype 
using Mindmeister1;
•	 Chatbot-based prototype Chatbots have been widely used 
as a solution for promptly handling user-inquiry [48, 48]. 
In prior works, most chatbots for DHH individuals were 
designed to use mainly their voice or gestures to com-
municate, not text [38, 40]. To figure out the potential of 
chatbot with text-based interaction for DHH individuals, 
our chatbot-based prototype provides a basic museum 
chatbot with buttons and an input textbox. It initially pro-
vides a few candidate question buttons (e.g., FAQs) on 
a target artifact rather than displaying all of the descrip-
tions at once (keypoint-based construction). However, 
there are fewer explorable topics (buttons) compared to 
the graph-based prototype. Users can get some answers 
by selecting a candidate question, but they mostly acquire 
more detailed information by typing their own questions. 
The chatbot-based prototype provides corresponding 
answers according to the user’s interests and preferences 
(hybrid exploration). Notably, this is the only one of the 
three prototypes that allow users to ask their own ques-
tions (enable user-inquiry). To ensure the quality of the 
chatbot system remained constant (e.g., avoiding misun-
derstanding an input question), we employed a Wizard-
of-Oz approach utilizing real-time human responses. We 
implemented the chatbot-based prototype using Chat-
fuel2.
3.2  Materials
3.2.1  Artifacts and descriptions
For this study, we first evaluated the difficulty level of 
descriptions of ten representative artifacts displayed 
Fig. 1   Four prototypes of description styles about a target artifact (e.g., Crane-pattern pillow)
Table 1   A summary of 
prototypes across three design 
dimensions
Dimension
Common
Active-linked
Graph-based
Chatbot-based
Exploration
No
Shallow
Progressive
Hybrid
Construction
Sentence-based
Sentence-based
Keypoint-based
Keypoint-based
User-inquiry
Disable
Disable
Disable
Enable
2  https://​chatf​uel.​com/.
1  https://​www.​mindm​eister.​com/.

917
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926	
1 3
in the Asian Ceramic Gallery of the Gwangju National 
Museum in Korea. Ten DHH individuals (not partici-
pants in the main study) assessed the difficulty level of 
the ten descriptions, and four descriptions similar in level 
and length were finally selected and used in this study. 
The length of the four descriptions ranged from 84 to 103 
words (M = 93), and 8 to 10 difficult words were included 
in each description. All descriptions were customized for 
each prototype. The number of explorable items (colored 
words in the active-linked, nodes in the graph-based, and 
candidate questions of the chatbot-based) are presented 
in Table 2. The common prototype, as a baseline, pro-
vides no explorable items. The chatbot-based prototype 
was designed to provide six candidate questions and users 
may ask a question to obtain more information. However, 
the chatbot can only answer questions based on the same 
information provided in the graph-based prototype.
3.2.2  Subjective evaluation questions
To measure the experience of DHH individuals with each 
prototype, five interaction metrics were considered (see 
Table  3). Understanding indicates how well participants 
can understand an artifact through a prototype. Desire to 
Explore indicates how much the prototype triggers their 
motivation to explore and know more about the target arti-
fact and Feedback indicates if the prototype provides suf-
ficient information to satisfy their curiosity. Usability and 
Interesting examine how easy and interesting the prototype 
is for DHH participants to use, respectively. All questions 
consist of a 7-point Likert-type scale of agreement rang-
ing from 1 = “Strongly disagree” to 7 = “Strongly agree.”
3.2.3  Post‑interview
At the end of the experiment, post-interviews were con-
ducted to understand participants’ experience of the four 
museum description types and obtain their feedback. First, 
in order to understand the difficulties they experience when 
exploring museums, we asked how they feel when they 
encounter conventional museum descriptions as well as 
their usual viewing styles. Next, we asked them to rank the 
four prototypes in order of preference from most to least 
and inquired as to the reason for their ordering. Finally, 
they were asked to provide any suggestions for a new tex-
tual interaction design and what other functions would be 
needed to enhance their museum experience.
3.3  Experiment
3.3.1  Procedure
A within-subject study was conducted where participants 
experienced all four prototypes. The data collection proce-
dure was as follows. First, after receiving an overview of the 
study, each participant signed a consent form and responded 
to demographic questions. Then they tested the four proto-
types according to a balanced Latin-Squares design, while 
the four artifacts were presented in the same order. Prior to 
Table 2   Number of explorable items in three prototypes
Numbers in parentheses of columns indicate the total number of words in the description. Note that the chatbot-based prototype can only pro-
vide answers that are found in the description of the graph-based prototype
Interaction style
Exploration level
Description 1
(101)
Description 2
(84)
Description 3
(84)
Description 4
(103)
Average
Active-linked
Level 1 (max)
14
19
21
17
17.8
Graph-based
Level 1
15
14
13
13
13.8
Level 2
8
12
8
13
10.3
Level 3 (max)
9
12
10
13
11.0
Chatbot-based
Level 1
6
6
6
6
6.0
Table 3   Interaction metrics 
and questions for subjective 
evaluation
Metric
Survey question
Understanding
This prototype made it easy for me to understand the description.
Desire to explore
I want to know more about artifacts when I use this prototype.
Feedback
This prototype answered what I was curious about.
Usability
This prototype was easy to use.
Interesting
This prototype was interesting.

918
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
using each prototype, participants watched a brief video that 
explained its use and functions and then explored one of the 
artifacts with it. Then, the participants responded to subjec-
tive questions. After examining all four prototypes, we con-
ducted post-interviews to collect opinions and feedback for 
our further understanding, and the participants were asked 
to order the prototypes by preference. To ensure clear com-
munication with participants, a sign language interpreter was 
present during all study procedures; that is, the study was 
conducted through communication among the researcher, 
the sign language interpreter, and a participant. The materi-
als used in this study included a tablet PC (to present the 
prototypes), the survey paper, and an interview sheet. The 
tablet PC screen was recorded to observe participants’ inter-
action procedure while using the prototypes. The study took 
approximately one hour and participants were compensated 
with 40K KRW ($34 USD) for their participation. All ethi-
cal and experimental procedures and protocols in this study 
were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of 
the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology.
3.3.2  Participants
Twenty participants identified as deaf or hard-of-hearing 
were recruited from a community rehabilitation center. 
Their average age was 47.35 (SD = 14.51), and the group 
comprised 11 females and nine males. All participants self-
identified as having severe deafness and the average age of 
hearing loss occurred was 3 years old (SD = 2.52). Their 
preferred languages included sign language (all partici-
pants), spoken language (2), and writing (2). When asked 
whether they had received any reading education, 16 partici-
pants answered “Yes” and four answered “No.” The earliest 
age and latest age of receiving reading education were 4 and 
22, respectively (M = 9.75, SD = 4.15). Additionally, in their 
assessment of the difficulty of the description immediately 
after experiencing the common prototype, nine participants 
identified it as hard, nine identified it as normal, and two 
identified it as easy.
4  Results
4.1  What difficulties do DHH individuals have 
when they encounter textual descriptions 
in museums? (RQ1)
4.1.1  Barriers to accessing information due to low literacy 
skills
Although many of them lacked background knowledge and 
educational experience about history, DHH participants had 
a great desire to learn historical stories and details. However, 
many participants reported significant difficulty understand-
ing museum descriptions consisting of long and complex 
sentences with difficult and unfamiliar vocabularies. When 
facing such difficult descriptions, four of the 20 participants 
(P3, P7, P14, and P15) responded that they tried to search 
the Web for more information to understand the artifact and 
its description, but the other participants stated they were 
more apt to give up and move on the next object. Many 
avoided asking questions (even when they were deeply curi-
ous about a particular artifact) because it was too inconven-
ient for them to communicate with others, e.g., people who 
verbally explain about the museum artifacts. In this situ-
ation, they refrain from seeking further knowledge unless 
there is a sign language interpreter, which is uncommon in 
most museums.
“Because there were many words that I didn’t know 
and it’s hard to understand the description of the arti-
facts, I could not know what the contents are, so I just 
skipped it. It doesn’t interest me because I cannot know 
the story about the artifact. It’s too boring to read eve-
rything, and there are too many difficult Chinese char-
acters and terminology.” – P4
“I want to tell my friend about the old history that hap-
pened in my neighborhood, but even if I want to know 
about the history, I can’t. It’s frustrating that I can’t 
tell my friend.”– P16
“When a description is provided with sign language, 
I can understand, my curiosity grows, and commu-
nication about artifacts occurs. However, when the 
description provided is a long sentence, it is incom-
prehensible and not accessible.”– P19
“I was frustrated that there was no solution when I 
wanted to know additional information.”– P2
4.1.2  Need for individual and active touring
Most DHH participants have visited museums as part of a 
group tour with a sign language interpreter who interprets 
descriptions of the exhibits. Many participants stated that 
a group tour with other DHH visitors to a museum is time-
consuming and expensive because they can only visit when 
an interpreter becomes available and must wait for all other 
DHH visitors to finish viewing each artifact. Some partici-
pants responded that they would like to explore the museum 
freely as individuals rather than as a group. With respect to 
interaction, they want contents they can react to, experiences 
they can participate in, and active interaction rather than 
one-sided and passive touring, even when a sign language 
interpreter is present. Some participants strongly expressed 

919
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926	
1 3
the preference for active touring in which they personally 
search for information and enjoy the museum independently.
“Five to ten DHH individuals usually gather together 
to watch with a docent and a sign language interpreter. 
The group tour is expensive and time-consuming.”– 
P13
“To be honest, I can only passively acquire the given 
information when I am provided with a description 
through a sign language interpreter....I wish there were 
a system that can respond immediately when DHH 
individuals are curious or want to know more about 
something.”– P19
“It is hard to enjoy it freely because there is a limit to 
group tours. I want to tour the exhibits alone.”– P16
“It is not fun because there is nothing that I can react 
to.” – P11
4.1.3  Negative emotions due to limited information 
accessibility and museum experience
Most participants felt frustrated, alienated, bored, and even 
fearful when they run into complicated descriptions; many 
thought the museum should have been more considerate of 
their needs. They also expressed a strong sense of discontent 
with their inability to comprehend the provided description 
since they failed to access the desired information. Some 
participants even thought that this situation was inevitable 
due to personal limitations, saying:
“It is my fault that I cannot understand because I am 
not good at understanding sentences.”– P15
“It is because I am not good at studying.”– P13
“That’s just my luck. I gave up.”– P12
4.2  Does the interaction help DHH individuals have 
a better experience with museum descriptions? 
(RQ2)
Figure 2 shows the mean score and distribution of interac-
tion metrics by the prototype. To check the reliability of 
the participants’ responses, we first calculated Cronbach’s 
alpha, which showed strong reliability for all subjective 
questions ( 훼= .89 ). We conducted a Friedman test for all 
four prototypes and Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for post-hoc 
pairwise comparison. The Friedman test indicated a signifi-
cant difference for all interaction metrics (Understanding 
휒2 = 14.946 , p = .002 ; DesireToExplore 휒2 = 25.757 , 
p = .000 ; Feedback 휒2 = 26.860 , p = .000 ; Usability 
휒2 = 23.800 , p = .000 ; Interesting 휒2 = 25.447 , p = .000 ). 
The post hoc pairwise comparison using Wilcoxon signed-
rank tests mostly revealed significant differences in the com-
parison of the common and other prototypes for every metric 
(see Fig. 2).
Subjective scores for all interaction metrics were high in 
the order of graph-based, active-linked, chatbot-based, and 
common prototype. In particular, the graph-based prototype 
had the highest scores for all metrics. Post-interviews with 
our participants revealed that compared to the common pro-
totype, most participants were more satisfied with the three 
other prototypes’ capacity to satiate their curiosity by pro-
viding feedback, e.g., definitions of unfamiliar words. They 
were also pleased that they were able to acquire in-depth 
information through additional visual images and relevant 
information provided for the artifacts.
Understanding is the most fundamental step in the 
museum experience since a good understanding about the 
exhibited artifacts often leads visitors to a better experience 
of museum contents. Regarding the current description of 
museums, DHH participants found it difficult to understand 
without additional explanation and images (mean score: 
3.4). In contrast, they responded that the graph-based (mean 
score: 5.3) and active-linked (mean score: 5.0) prototypes 
Fig. 2   Comparison of participants’ responses to interaction metrics by prototype with significant pairwise differences (*p < 0.05 , **p < 0.01 , 
and ***p < 0.001)

920
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
substantially helped them comprehend the description of a 
target artifact with additional information including images 
that could be easily accessed by clicking colored words or 
nodes: “I was able to satiate my curiosity because there was 
an explanation of the word.” (P5) and “It was nice to have a 
lot of pictures related to this artifact” (P8). For the chatbot-
based prototype (mean score: 4.5), only a few individuals 
were satisfied with typing custom queries to support their 
further understanding of artifacts.
Desire to explore indicates whether a prototype may 
trigger the desire of users to know more about an artifact 
while experiencing it, and Feedback conveys if it provides 
a proper answer to their curiosity. With the common proto-
type, participants had questions and wanted to find out more 
while reading the description, but they were frustrated that 
there was no pathway to acquire further information on the 
description (DesireToExplore: 4.1; Feedback: 3.2). On the 
other hand, they evaluated that the graph-based (DesireTo-
Explore: 5.9; Feedback: 5.7) and active-linked (DesireTo-
Explore: 5.4; Feedback: 5.5) prototypes strongly motivated 
their exploration desire and provided appropriate feedback. 
Particularly, the majority of participants (17 out of 20) had 
a strong desire to explore and progressively opened 73% of 
nodes in Level 1 and 49% of nodes in Levels 2 & 3 in the 
graph-based prototype. Similarly, 15 out of 20 participants 
demonstrated an eagerness to explore by clicking 71% of 
color-highlighted keywords of the active-linked prototype. 
The nodes of the graph-based and the color-highlighted 
keywords in the active-linked appear to have significantly 
positively impacted their desire to explore by offering sup-
plemental materials according to their interest: “The infor-
mation in the graph is connected to each other, and it was 
nice to be able to see them by opening [the nodes]” (P17) 
and “The words were colored so I could enter according to 
my curiosity” (P1 and P18).
However, despite the fact that the chatbot-based prototype 
can provide additional information like graph-based and 
active-linked prototypes, this prototype seems to have been 
rated by participants as less satisfactory in satiating their 
curiosity with adequate feedback related to their interests 
(DesireToExplore: 5.2; Feedback: 4.5). One possible reason 
is that they did not know what questions to ask. The chat-
bot-based prototype provided six candidate questions, but 
these were insufficient to reflect all participants’ interests. 
Another explanation is that it is difficult to communicate 
with the chatbot in an interrogative sentence format. We 
observed that most DHH participants just asked one question 
or refrained from asking at all because they were hesitant to 
type their query as a sentence. As a result, they soon ceased 
exploration to find more information.
Usability and Interesting show how convenient a proto-
type is to use and how interesting it is to explore informa-
tion, respectively. The graph-based (Usability: 6.3; Inter-
esting: 6.3) and active-linked (Usability: 5.6; Interesting: 
5.9) prototypes are fairly easy to use and interesting, even 
though they only provide a very simple interaction func-
tionality, i.e., clicking: “It’s fun to click” (P11) and “It was 
pleasurable to visit the nodes” (P14). It would appear that 
the simple act of clicking precisely meets the need of users 
to explore an area of their specific interest instead of being 
informed of all contents: “It’s nice to be able to click and 
see only what I am curious about, not the sentences” (P14). 
Most participants were interested in the chatbot-based pro-
totype (Interesting: 5.3), but, as previously mentioned, many 
participants had a bad experience of formulating and typing 
their own input queries (Usability: 4.7). In fact, many muse-
ums are introducing chatbot services in order to help visitors 
ask questions about the artifacts and the museums, but this 
result signifies that the user-inquiry functionality has to be 
designed carefully for DHH individuals. For the common 
prototype, they evaluated that it was the least useful and the 
most boring since they only passively received information 
without any interaction (Usability: 3.9; Interesting: 3.8).
4.3  Potential and limitations of interaction styles 
(RQ3)
From the previous section (RQ2), we found that the graph-
based prototype showed positive interaction results for DHH 
participants in all interaction metrics. However, in terms of 
Fig. 3   Preference ranking for 
the prototypes

921
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926	
1 3
preference, we observed that it does not address the needs 
of all participants. As shown in Fig. 3, there were different 
preferences for each prototype. The graph-based prototype 
was the most preferred prototype, followed by active-linked 
and chatbot-based, with the common prototype ranking last. 
A total of nine of the 20 participants reported graph-based 
as the first preferred type, while more than half of the par-
ticipants (11 of the 20 participants) reported common as the 
least preferred type. Active-linked was observed to have the 
same popularity as graph-based overall, but participants 
slightly preferred graph-based over active-linked as the first 
preference. Contrary to our expectations, the chatbot-based 
prototype showed a greater degree of preference compared 
to the other types, where the participants either greatly liked 
or disliked it.
4.3.1  Graph‑based—Just display key points and I will 
explore by myself.
A total of 16 out of 20 participants had a positive experience 
with the graph-based prototype (ranking it first or second 
most preferable) since it is visually concise and the connec-
tion between presented facts is clear.
“I liked that it was not a sentence, and I liked the way 
that I could target information I was curious about 
by simply clicking on it. [The graph-based prototype] 
is an easy way for DHH individuals to find informa-
tion.” – P14
The graph structure seems to appeal to DHH individuals 
who have a sense of repulsion to sentences; the content is 
summarized rather than presented in many sentences at once 
and the connectivity between information is visually mapped 
based on keywords. Regarding this aspect, the sign language 
interpreter who participated in this study also commented:
“[The graph-based prototype] may be easier for DHH 
people to understand because the graph structure 
seems to be similar to the structure of expressing sign 
language sentences (a way of expressing and arrang-
ing relationships between words)”.
Some participants (P11, P13, P18, P19, and P20) were 
highly interested in the interaction method itself that unfolds 
information progressively when clicked, reporting: “Click-
ing (interaction) is fun, and expanding an idea when clicked 
is fun” (P13). They also evaluated such methods positively 
because they could acquire in-depth information through 
expanding interaction. Those who favored the graph-based 
prototype explored nodes at a much deeper level than those 
who did not (47% vs. 6%).
“It was great to see more and more information spread 
out and expand about one aspect. In this way, it was 
possible to acquire in-depth information.”– P19
“It was good to expand, and it was fun and good to be 
able to dive deeper if you had any questions.”– P18
Since DHH individuals are reluctant to read long sentences 
where all information is presented at once in a line-by-line 
format, it would be advisable to display key content instead 
so that they can actively explore by themselves whenever 
they so desire, i.e., when they are curious. From this point 
of view, the graph-based prototype helped promote DHH 
individuals active exploration.
“To be honest, I can only passively acquire the given 
information when I am provided with a description 
through a sign language interpreter, but in the case of 
the graph style, it is good that I can acquire informa-
tion actively. If this type were provided in the museum, 
I would use it again.”– P19
However, there were some participants who evaluated this 
prototype negatively (P1, P7, P10, and P16). One partici-
pant felt the graph format was rather complicated. Other 
participants pointed out that the contextual information of 
the existing description was lost in the graph because it was 
a summary of relationships only.
“It was complicated and made me dizzy. I don’t know 
what it’s trying to say” – P7
“[The active-linked prototype] was easier to under-
stand as additional information came out in the com-
mon description, but I didn’t feel that the information 
was connected here (in the graph).” – P1
4.3.2  Active‑linked—Keep original context, just add more 
on it.
A total of 14 of the 20 participants selected the active-linked 
prototype as their first or second preferred style. Participants 
favoring this type responded extremely positively to the 
color highlighting of some words.
“It was good and helpful to provide additional infor-
mation by categorizing it by color. Adding color rather 
than plain black text made it easier to access informa-
tion.” – P1
“Deaf people really like things with color. It feels 
like suggesting something I don’t know, and it’s easy 
to understand when I check it. I’ve never seen such 
a method before, but it’s so nice. In particular, deaf 
people are really weak when it comes to text. If sign 
language is added here, there is nothing more to ask 
for.”– P14

922
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
As seen above, some preferred to add an exploration func-
tion while preserving the existing description itself. There 
were many opinions that it is better to be provided the option 
to click and explore additional information when curiosity 
arises while reading the context of an existing description.
“It was good because I gain additional information 
while reading intuitively.” – P6
“[Using the active-linked prototype,] the description 
was easy to understand because it was connected to 
the original sentence. I can click on it only when I 
don’t know the meaning of a word or I am curious 
about it.” – P12
“It was more difficult than the graph style, but it was 
good to know the knowledge about difficult-to-find 
words right away.” P14 (who selected the active-linked 
as the 2nd preference)
Conversely, those who exhibit a strong sense of reluctance to 
sentences had a negative experience with the active-linked 
prototype. These individuals preferred the keyword-based 
construction such as graph-based and chatbot-based rather 
than the sentence-based style (common and active-linked). 
P13 even stated that because the active-linked prototype dis-
played many sentences from the beginning, it was a little 
different from the common prototype.
“It was good to get pictures when I clicked buttons, 
but it was difficult to understand because of many sen-
tences. I wanted to know in-depth, even if I got only 
one new fact, but it was hard to understand because 
the information was presented in complex and long 
sentences.”– P19
Some participants reported that the depth of exploration was 
shallow and could not satisfy their curiosity. This indicates 
that DHH individuals may want to actively explore infor-
mation at a deeper level. In particular, participants (P2, P4, 
P5, and P15) who demonstrated a low preference for the 
active-linked prototype, preferred the types that could be 
explored deeply such as graph-based and chatbot-based. 
These individuals’ average usage time in the active-linked 
prototype (137 s) was lower than the average time for all par-
ticipants (145 s), but their time spent exploring the graph-
based prototype (219 s) was higher than the average time for 
all participants (195 s).
“The active-linked button alone did not satisfy my 
curiosity. My curiosity hasn’ been satiated much with 
this type.” – P19
“With this style, I discovered some new information 
such as the fact that the ship was sunk in Sinan, but I 
couldn’t find any other information.”– P18
4.3.3  Chatbot‑based—Immediate answer to my pressing 
questions.
Although many participants found it difficult to use the 
chatbot-based prototype, there were seven participants who 
selected this type as their first choice. These individuals 
expressed that they felt more freedom in being able to ask 
questions directly compared to the other types, dependent 
on context and exploration. Except for P10, who was 71 
years old, six enjoyed interacting with the chatbot enough 
to spend approximately twice as much time as those who did 
not prefer this prototype (5.7 min vs. 3 min).
“The chatbot was fun to interact with as it gave 
answers that directly satisfied my curiosity, but the 
second (graph-based) doesn’t have that aspect.” – P2
“It was the easiest to use because it gave feedback 
right away. It’s nice to be able to focus on finding only 
what you’re interested in. The rest [other types] are 
limited in that they provide set information.” – P4
“It was cool to be able to ask questions right away 
when I don’t understand something. When will chatbot 
be launched in Gwangju National Museum? I want to 
use it soon.”– P15
A few participants responded positively to the candidate 
question buttons. Because DHH individuals did not know 
what sorts of questions to ask due to limited knowledge 
of history, they found the buttons more useful to obtain 
information. In general, the chatbot-based prototype was 
preferred by young people (P1, P2, P4, and P5 were all 
individuals in their 20s) as well as by people who were not 
burdened with writing sentences.
Even though the chatbot-based prototype provides a key-
point-based construction, e.g., candidate questions, similar 
to the graph-based, the rest of the participants found it diffi-
cult to interact with. Unanswered queries could be answered 
only by typing questions due to the limited number of but-
tons implemented in the chatbot-based prototype. However, 
many participants simply pressed the candidate question 
buttons and very few typed a question directly (the average 
number of direct questions was 1). Owing to the difficulty of 
formulating sentences, many felt uncomfortable interacting 
with the chatbot. Notably, if they do not use the user-inquiry 
function and simply press the buttons, the chatbot-based 
prototype may be a little different from the graph-based or 
active-linked types.
“It was difficult because I was not familiar with chat-
bots. It is burdensome to have to type something in a 
full sentence.”– P20
“I think it would be difficult for DHH individuals to 
use a chatbot because they have difficulty writing sen-

923
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926	
1 3
tences. Still, it’s good to ask questions about topics 
I don’t understand. However, this style feels similar 
to the graph-based style in that I get feedback when 
I press a button. Both the graph and the chatbot felt 
similar to me.” – P14
In other words, unless DHH individuals can use the ‘direct 
question’ function, which is the advantage of chatbots, there 
is no advantage to the chatbot-based for them compared to 
the other prototypes. Thus, researchers seeking to provide a 
chatbot-based description may need to focus more on tailor-
ing the specifics of the recommendation function to adapt to 
DHH individuals’ needs.
4.3.4  Common (conventional) – That’s why it is common.
There was one person who preferred the common prototype. 
He expressed confidence in writing and reading sentences 
to the extent that writing is one of his preferred languages. 
He also stated that he disliked unfamiliar and complicated 
things and felt that the existing description was sufficient 
for him.
“I liked the general description and its simplicity. I 
don’t really have any questions, and it’s the type I’ve 
seen a lot in museums.” – P7
Thus, it would appear that those possessing strong literacy 
skills who can obtain enough information with the existing 
description would be sufficiently satisfied with the common 
description style.
5  Discussion
The results collected and analyzed in the present study allow 
us to extend the discussion beyond a simple comparison of 
the museum description styles. In what follows, we discuss 
implications and suggestions for enhancing the museum 
experience of DHH individuals based on their present 
museum experience and the results of our study.
5.1  Potentials of text description styles for DHH 
individuals
Our results show that besides sign language content, the 
text-based description commonly seen in museums and 
familiar to hearing individuals can be improved in terms of 
the level of information accessibility and exhibit interaction. 
Although they are interested in museum touring and histori-
cal knowledge, poor information accessibility limits them 
from receiving rich information and achieving a satisfying 
museum experience. As the majority of DHH individuals 
have a lower degree of literacy compared to hearing people, 
providing some additional visual materials and explanations 
to supplement the common description made them feel more 
satisfied and cared for as museum visitors. However, in addi-
tion to these supplements, the method of provision is also 
an important aspect to consider when moving forward in 
attempts to enhance DHH individuals’ museum experiences.
5.2  Text descriptions are as important as sign 
language descriptions
When we asked the participants to suggest a new description 
style during post-interviews, most expressed a strong desire 
to receive additional sign language content, as expected. 
However, they also said that sign language alone may be 
insufficient in conveying descriptions. Sign language varies 
from country to country, but only approximately 4.5% of the 
words in the Standard Korean Language Dictionary appear 
in the Korean Sign Language Dictionary. Unregistered 
words are often expressed in fingerspelling (words spelled 
in a sign language representation of the alphabet) or combi-
nations of several words. It was confirmed that the museum’s 
sign language descriptions expressed single Korean words 
in protracted fingerspelling or were truncated by exclud-
ing complex information from the original description. As 
a result, not all information from the original descriptions 
may have been included in the sign language content. This, 
in turn, suggests that sign language alone may be insufficient 
in providing a fully satisfying museum experience.
Numerous participants felt that it is more useful to pro-
vide both sign language and text when explaining museum 
contents rather than to provide only sign language descrip-
tions. For example, P4 stated, “It is difficult to distinguish 
the meaning of sign language because there are many iden-
tical words. Sign language consists of short words, so text 
must be provided as well to facilitate clear understanding.” 
P13 added, “If a sign language video is provided, it is easy 
to understand, but if I watch only sign language, I usually 
miss the content. Sign language has no word order, so hav-
ing the text together helps improve comprehension.”
There was also an opinion that participants should be 
able to select the format they find most useful. Our results 
showed that although they share the common attribute of 
“deafness”, participants were diverse in terms of literacy 
skills, preferred language, curiosity, interest, and desire 
to explore. Therefore, we need to respond to their various 
attributes and preferences, present them with different types 
of content, and allow them autonomy to select the descrip-
tion method that works best for them. The concept of provid-
ing autonomy is aligned with a prior study that suggested 
autonomy should be ensured [2].

924
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
“Sign language and text should be provided together, 
but I wish I could choose. I hope that deaf people who 
need sign language will receive sign language and 
deaf people who prefer text will receive text so that 
they can see the description. The best and most flexible 
method would be to provide both options and allow 
the viewer to select what works best for him/her. Nei-
ther option is complete, so the text and sign language 
should be provided at the same time.” – P14
5.3  Shifting from passive touring to active touring
Our results showed that the interaction of DHH individu-
als with museum descriptions was improved compared to 
the common description style by merely adding a simple 
and small interaction such as click or touch. Although it 
was a minor change to add a small interactive element to 
the common text, it significantly increased participant sat-
isfaction. As indicated by the answers to RQ1, since DHH 
individuals desire active and explorative touring rather than 
passive one-way information consumption, museums are 
advised to provide interactive content. In addition to a sign 
language, it is possible to attract DHH individuals’ interac-
tion through content that can work well for both DHH and 
hearing individuals.
5.4  High demands for personal touring
As mentioned, DHH individuals had no choice but to sched-
ule a group tour with other deaf people accompanied by sign 
language interpretation when visiting a museum. Therefore, 
support for individual and active touring for DHH individu-
als is necessary. Recently, museums have been offering per-
sonalized touring using personal devices, commonly referred 
to as “Bring Your Own Device” tours [39]. If researchers 
want to create museum content for diverse target audiences, 
especially DHH visitors, they may consider the various 
description styles evaluated in our study as potential design 
considerations.
6  Limitations and future work
Our study has several limitations. First, we observed that 
sign language is effective in conveying information to 
DHH individuals, but we focused on the potential of “text” 
descriptions as the modality by which DHH individuals 
obtain information. Reflecting on the interview results that 
indicate that DHH individuals desire information conveyed 
in both text and sign language and prefer to be able to choose 
between text, sign language, or both modes when obtain-
ing information, the future extension of current prototypes 
with sign language would be optimal. In this regard, the 
characteristics of the particular sign language used must be 
considered, since sign languages vary by country and region.
Second, although we aimed to recruit a balanced age 
population, the majority of DHH participants (11 out of 
20) were in their 40s and 50s. Because there is a difference 
between the education level of young and middle-age DHH 
individuals, our participants may not be generalizable to all 
DHH individuals. Subjective evaluation scores and prefer-
ences between description styles will slightly differ when 
balancing the age population of the participants. Future 
work should pay more attention to DHH individuals’ demo-
graphics, especially balancing age populations and education 
levels.
Third, we intended to conduct this study in an actual 
museum, but due to the COVID-19 restrictions we were 
unable to use actual museum facilities. Thus, future studies 
should conduct experiments in museums to better under-
stand the usage aspects of each descriptive style of DHH 
individuals in real-world situations.
Fourth, our study focused on a small sample of only four 
artifacts. Thus, the findings should be verified by applying 
them to other artifacts with different levels of descriptions 
throughout the museum. We also need to ensure that our 
findings can be applied in other domains (e.g., art museums, 
science museums, etc.) besides history museums. Through 
future works we can apply our results to various domains to 
validate their veracity.
Finally, our study was evaluated focusing DHH visitors 
with low literacy levels. However, considering that text 
descriptions are common in museums and more familiar to 
hearing visitors, our approach can also be applied to hearing 
people. Therefore, future research must validate and further 
develop how our approach affects the museum experience of 
various visitor groups (e.g., hearing people and people with 
cognitive deficits or learning difficulties).
7  Conclusion
Museum text descriptions have the potential to expand visi-
tors’ experience of artifacts through detailed and rich infor-
mation, but accessibility and experience have been consid-
erably limited for DHH visitors with low reading ability. 
This paper proposed three interactive description methods 
designed under the considerations of exploration, construc-
tion, and user-inquiry. We observed the strong potential of 
the graph-based description style in museums for DHH visi-
tors, which allows them to explore descriptions according to 
their interests (progressive exploration) and presents concise 
visuals rather than overwhelming users with all explanations 
at once (keypoint-based construction). According to the 
various preferences of DHH participants, the active-linked 
and chatbot-based styles also significantly improved their 

925
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926	
1 3
experience compared to the conventional description. The 
chatbot-based style showed potential in terms of interesting 
interaction, but it requires a careful design to ensure usabil-
ity for DHH individuals. The post-interview reflects the vari-
ous needs and preferences of DHH individuals in museums, 
such as individual and active touring and a high preference 
for color highlights. Although this study focused on DHH 
individuals, our approach is not limited to DHH visitors. 
Considering that textual description is the most basic form 
of description in museums, our approach can be applied to 
a general audience to provide an accessible and rich experi-
ence in museums. We hope our approach and insights could 
be beneficial for future works studying museum contents 
for DHH visitors, and more generally, for various groups 
of visitors.
Funding  This research was supported by Culture, Sports and Tour-
ism R &D Program through the Korea Creative Content Agency grant 
funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism in 2022 (Project 
Name: Development of Intelligent Exhibition Commentary Platforms 
for Deaf-Korean Sign Language/Word Translation Systems, Project 
Number: R2020060002, Contribution Rate: 50%). This research was 
supported by the GIST-MIT Research Collaboration grant funded by 
the GIST in 2022 (Contribution Rate: 50%)
Availability of data and materials  The data that support the findings of 
this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request. The data are not publicly available due to containing informa-
tion that could compromise research participant privacy/consent
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author 
states that there is no conflict of interest.
References
	 1.	 Alonzo, O., Elliot, L., Dingman, B., et al.: Reading experiences 
and interest in reading-assistance tools among deaf and hard-of-
hearing computing professionals. In: The 22nd International ACM 
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, ASSETS 
’20, (2020).https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33736​25.​34169​92
	 2.	 Alonzo, O., Seita, M., Glasser, A., et al.: Automatic text simplifi-
cation tools for deaf and hard of hearing adults: Benefits of lexical 
simplification and providing users with autonomy. In: Proceedings 
of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, p 1–13 (2020). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33138​31.​33765​63
	 3.	 Alonzo, O., Trussell, J., Dingman, B., et al.: Comparison of meth-
ods for evaluating complexity of simplified texts among deaf and 
hard-of-hearing adults at different literacy levels. In: Proceedings 
of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, CHI ’21,(2021). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​34117​64.​34450​38
	 4.	 Banner, A., Wang, Y.: An analysis of the reading strategies used 
by adult and student deaf readers. J. Deaf Stud. Deaf Educ. 16(1), 
2–23 (2011). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​deafed/​enq027
	 5.	 Barbosa, P., Amorim, P., Ferreira, S.B.L., et al.: Supporting 
spontaneous museum visits by deaf people: An augmented real-
ity application and a case study. Augmented Reality in Tourism, 
Museums and Heritage pp 173–193 (2021).https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​978-3-​030-​70198-7_​10
	 6.	 Berke, L., Kafle, S., Huenerfauth, M.: Methods for evaluation 
of imperfect captioning tools by deaf or hard-of-hearing users at 
different reading literacy levels. In: the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp 1–12 (2018). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​31735​74.​31736​65
	 7.	 Bragg, D., Koller, O., Bellard, M., et al.: Sign language recog-
nition, generation, and translation: an interdisciplinary perspec-
tive. In: The 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on 
Computers and Accessibility, Pittsburgh, United States, (2019). 
https://​hal.​archi​ves-​ouver​tes.​fr/​hal-​02394​580
	 8.	 Bragg, D., Caselli, N., Hochgesang, J.A., et al.: The fate landscape 
of sign language Ai datasets: an interdisciplinary perspective. 
ACM Trans. Access Comput. 14(2), 1–45 (2021). https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1145/​34369​96
	 9.	 Bélanger, N.N., Rayner, K.: Frequency and predictability effects 
in eye fixations for skilled and less-skilled deaf readers. Vis. Cogn. 
21(4), 477–497 (2013). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13506​285.​2013.​
804016
	10.	 Cavender, A.C., Bigham, J.P., Ladner, R.E.: Classinfocus: Ena-
bling improved visual attention strategies for deaf and hard of 
hearing students. In: Proceedings of the 11th International ACM 
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Assets 
’09, pp 67–74 (2009). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​16396​42.​16396​56,
	11.	 Chung, J.W., Min, H.J., Kim, J., et al.: Enhancing readability 
of web documents by text augmentation for deaf people. In: the 
9th ACM International Conference on PErvasive Technologies 
Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA ’16). ACM, pp 1–10 
(2016) https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​24797​87.​24798​08
	12.	 Constantinou, V., Loizides, F., Ioannou, A.: A personal tour of 
cultural heritage for deaf museum visitors. In: Ioannides, M., 
Fink, E., Moropoulou, A., et al. (eds.) Digital Heritage. Progress 
in Cultural Heritage: Documentation, Preservation, and Pro-
tection, pp. 214–221. Springer International Publishing, Cham 
(2016). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​48974-2_​24
	13.	 Convertino, C., Borgna, G., Marschark, M., et al.: Word and 
world knowledge among deaf learners with and without cochlear 
implants. J. Deaf Stud. Deaf Educ. 19(4), 471–483 (2014). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1093/​deafed/​enu024
	14.	 Davey, B., King, S.: Acquisition of word meanings from context 
by deaf readers. Am. Ann. Deaf 135(3), 227–234 (1990). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1353/​aad.​2012.​0555
	15.	 Domínguez, A.B., Alegria, J.: Reading mechanisms in orally edu-
cated deaf adults. J. Deaf Stud. Deaf Educ. 15(2), 136–148 (2010). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​deafed/​enp033
	16.	 Dostal, H., Gabriel, R., Weir, J.: Supporting the literacy develop-
ment of students who are deaf/hard of hearing in inclusive class-
rooms. Read. Teach. 71(3), 327–334 (2017). https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1002/​trtr.​1619
	17.	 Furlonger, B.E.: The challenge of learning to read written 
english for the profoundly pre-lingually deaf adult. 3L: Lan-
guage, Linguistics® 22(3), (2016) https://​doi.​org/​10.​17576/​
3L-​2016-​2203-​01
	18.	 Gazi, A.: Writing text for museums of technology the case of the 
industrial gas museum in athens. Museum Manag. Curatorship 
33(1), 57–78 (2018). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09647​775.​2017.​
14163​10
	19.	 Gennari, R., Mich, O.: Constraint-based temporal reasoning for 
e-learning with lode. In: Bessière, C. (ed.) Principles and Prac-
tice of Constraint Programming - CP 2007, pp. 90–104. Springer, 

926
	
Universal Access in the Information Society (2024) 23:913–926
1 3
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2007). https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​978-3-​540-​74970-7_9
	20.	 Goss, J., Kollmann, E.K., Reich, C., et al.: Understanding the 
multilingualism and communication of museum visitors who are 
d/deaf or hard of hearing. Museums Social Issues 10(1), 52–65 
(2015). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1179/​15596​89314z.​00000​000032
	21.	 Hammami, S., Saeed, F., Mathkour, H., et  al.: Continuous 
improvement of deaf student learning outcomes based on an 
adaptive learning system and an academic advisor agent. Comput. 
Hum. Behav. 92, 536–546 (2019). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​
2017.​07.​006
	22.	 History of Place: Accessible exhibitions for all: a guide to co-
designing exhibitons with disabled people, (2018). https://​histo​
ryof.​place/​toolk​its/
	23.	 Hooper-Greenhill, E.: Museums and education: Purpose, peda-
gogy, performance. Routledge, UK (2007)
	24.	 Inui, K., Fujita, A., Takahashi, T., et al.: Text simplification for 
reading assistance: A project note. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, USA, PARAPHRASE ’03, pp 9–16 (2003). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3115/​11189​84.​11189​86
	25.	 Kafle, S., Huenerfauth, M.: Effect of speech recognition errors on 
text understandability for people who are deaf or hard of hearing. 
In: 7th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assis-
tive Technologies, INTERSPEECH (2016)
	26.	 Kafle, S., Yeung, P., Huenerfauth, M.: Evaluating the benefit of 
highlighting key words in captions for people who are deaf or hard 
of hearing. In: The 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Confer-
ence on Computers and Accessibility. Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, ASSETS ’19, pp 43-55 (2019). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33085​61.​33537​81
	27.	 Kato, N., Kitamura, M., Wakatsuki, D., et al.: How to make 
captioning services for deaf and hard of hearing visitors more 
effective in museums? In: 2020 12th International Conference on 
Education Technology and Computers (ICETC’20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, pp 157–160 (2019). https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1145/​34367​56.​34370​38
	28.	 Kjeldsen, A.K., Jensen, M.N.: When words of wisdom are not 
wise. a study of accessibility in museum exhibition texts. Nordisk 
museologi 1, 91–91 (2015). https://​doi.​org/​10.​5617/​nm.​3002
	29.	 Kushalnagar, P., Smith, S., Hopper, M., et al.: Making cancer 
health text on the internet easier to read for deaf people who use 
American sign language. J. Cancer Educ. 33(1), 134–140 (2018). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s13187-​016-​1059-5
	30.	 Lisney, E., Bowen, J.P., Hearn, K., et al.: Museums and technol-
ogy: being inclusive helps accessibility for all. Curator: Museum 
J. 56(3), 353–361 (2013). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​cura.​12034
	31.	 Luckner, J.L., Handley, C.M.: A summary of the reading compre-
hension research undertaken with students who are deaf or hard 
of hearing. Am. Ann. Deaf 153(1), 6–36 (2008). https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1353/​aad.0.​0006
	32.	 Martins, P.R.: Engaging the d/deaf audience in museums: a case 
study at the calouste gulbenkian museum. J. Museum Educ. 41(3), 
202–209 (2016). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10598​650.​2016.​11933​16
	33.	 Mayer, C.: What really matters in the early literacy development 
of deaf children. J. Deaf Stud. Deaf Educ. 12(4), 411–431 (2007). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​deafed/​enm020
	34.	 Milicchio, F., Prosperi, M.: Accessible tourism for the deaf via 
mobile apps. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Con-
ference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environ-
ments. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
PETRA ’16, (2016). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​29106​74.​29106​94
	35.	 Namatame, M., Kitamula, M., Wakatsuki, D., et al.: Can exhibit-
explanations in sign language contribute to the accessibility of 
aquariums? In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) HCI International 2019 - 
Posters, pp. 289–294. Springer International Publishing, Cham 
(2019). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​23522-2_​37
	36.	 Napoli, D.J., Sutton-Spence, R.: Limitations on simultaneity in 
sign language. Language 86(3), 647–662 (2010). https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1353/​lan.​2010.​0018
	37.	 Nirala, K.K., Singh, N.K., Purani, V.S.: A survey on providing 
customer and public administration based services using Ai: 
chatbot. Multimed. Tools Appl. (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11042-​021-​11458-y
	38.	 Pardasani, A., Sharma, A.K., Banerjee, S., et al.: Enhancing the 
ability to communicate by synthesizing american sign language 
using image recognition in a chatbot for differently abled. In: 2018 
7th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies 
and Optimization (Trends and Future Directions) (ICRITO), pp 
529–532 (2018). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICRITO.​2018.​87485​90
	39.	 Petrelli, D., O’Brien, S.: Phone vs. tangible in museums: a com-
parative study. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, CHI ’18, pp 1–12 (2018). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​31735​74.​31736​86
	40.	 Rajkumar, G., Gayathri: Chatbot with gesture based user input. 
Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol. (IRJET) 7(2), (2020)
	41.	 Ravelli, L.: Museum texts: comunication frameworks. Routledge 
(2007). https://​doi.​org/​10.​4324/​97802​03964​187
	42.	 Ruiz, B., Pajares, J.L., Utray, F., et al.: Design for all in multime-
dia guides for museums. Comput. Hum. Behav. 27(4), 1408–1415 
(2011). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2010.​07.​044
	43.	 Sarrafzadeh, B., Lank, E.: Improving exploratory search expe-
rience through hierarchical knowledge graphs. Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, SIGIR ’17, pp 
145–154 (2017). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​30771​36.​30808​29
	44.	 Sarrafzadeh, B., Vtyurina, A., Lank, E., et al.: Knowledge graphs 
versus hierarchies: An analysis of user behaviours and perspec-
tives in information seeking. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM 
on Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval. 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
CHIIR ’16, pp 91–100 (2016). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​28549​46.​
28549​58
	45.	 Smithsonian Institution: Smithsonian guidelines for accessible 
exhibition design. Retrieved from https://access.si.edu/museum-
professionals (2010)
	46.	 Strachan, H.: Developing effective museum text: a case study from 
caithness. Scotland, UK (2017)
	47.	 Trezek, B., Mayer, C.: Reading and deafness: state of the evidence 
and implications for research and practice. Educ. Sci. 9(3), 216 
(2019). https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​educs​ci903​0216
	48.	 Varitimiadis, S., Kotis, K., Skamagis, A., et al.: Towards imple-
menting an ai chatbot platform for museums. In: International 
Conference on Cultural Informatics, Communication & Media 
Studies (2020). https://​doi.​org/​10.​12681/​cicms.​2732
	49.	 Wang, Y.: Inquiry-based science instruction and performance lit-
eracy for students who are deaf or hard of hearing. Am. Ann. Deaf 
156(3), 239–254 (2011)
	50.	 Zazove, P., Meador, H.E., Reed, B.D., et al.: Deaf persons’ english 
reading levels and associations with epidemiological, educational, 
and cultural factors. J. Health Commun. 18(7), 760–772 (2013). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10810​730.​2012.​743633
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.

