MuseumsForward 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords 
 
 
 
Committee Chair 
 
Committee Members 
 
A case study of art museum programs for persons 
with intellectual and developmental disabilities 
 
Emily F. Snider 
 
This article discusses a multi-site case study focused on investigating 
art museum programming designed for persons with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities (IDD) such as: Fragile X syndrome, Down 
syndrome, and Autism Spectrum Disorder. The researcher examines 
how the artmaking process provides a means by which to express 
feelings and emotions in a socially acceptable, non-verbal manner, as 
well as the assumption that artmaking might help persons with IDDs, 
especially when promoted in the terms of art therapy. In order to 
explore the concept of offering art therapy as a means of furthering a 
museums’ mission to increase DEAI initiatives, the researcher 
employed a semi-structured interview approach to glean museum best 
practices in designing, implementing, facilitating and evaluation of art 
museum program offerings for persons with IDDs. The interviewees, 
selected by specific criteria, were 5 facilitators of accessible art museum 
programming across 4 case study sites in the United States. The 
findings demonstrate the benefits of community partnerships as well 
as a holistic approach to accessibility, within art museum settings. This 
article also discusses suggestions for further research to fill the gaps in 
our knowledge and understanding of the diverse needs of persons with 
IDDs, a need for more inclusive evaluation methodology, as well as 
recommendations for further research into virtual program offerings 
for persons with IDDs, in determining how to benefit persons with IDDs 
in a post-pandemic art museum setting. 
 
IDD, intellectual disability, developmental disability, art therapy, art 
museum 
 
Meena Selvakumar 
 
Joanne Woiak; Charles Peck 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 2 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted: June 11, 2021 
Published: October 2021 
 
Approximately 6.5 million people in the United States have an 
intellectual disability, characterized by “significant limitations in both 
intellectual functioning and in adaptive behavior” (CDC, 2021a), while 
over 55 million people in the United States have a form of 
developmental disability, defined as “a group of conditions due to an 
impairment in physical, learning, language, or behavior areas” (CDC, 
2021b). The most common forms of intellectual and developmental 
disabilities (IDD) are: Fragile X syndrome, seen in 1 in 7,000 male and 1 
in11,000 female births each year (CDC, 2021c); Down syndrome, seen in 
700 births each year (CDC, 2021b); and Autism Spectrum Disorder, seen 
in 1 out of 54 births each year (CDC, 2020). Despite how common IDDs 
are, there is significant social stigma faced by persons with IDDs, due to 
their appearance, developmental delays and verbal limitations (Barnes, 
1997). Due to this social stigma, persons with IDDs are consistently 
discriminated against, denied access to employment that pays living 
wages, and are often segregated in both formal and informal 
educational spaces (Disability Justice, 2020). According to the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (ADA), “Disability is a natural part of the human 
existence and in no way diminishes the right of persons with 
developmental disabilities to live independently, enjoy self-
determination, make choices, contribute to society, and experience full 
integration and inclusion in the economic, political, social, cultural, and 
educational mainstream of American society” (ADA, 1990). 
Museums have made great strides towards disability justice in the 30 
years following ADA, by working towards removing physical barriers to 
access. According to ADA accessibility best practices, “elements such as 
entrances without stairs, exhibit labels that can be read by visitors who 
are seated or standing, large-print exhibition brochures, and captioned 
multimedia programs help museums reach this huge and growing 
audience” (Expanding Your Market: Maintaining Accessibility in 
Museums, 2009). As museums answer the call towards accessibility 
best practices, the next big push towards becoming truly accessible 
spaces of community building, can be found in efforts to design spaces, 
programs, and educational offerings with cognitive disabilities in mind 
(Mykitiuk, Chaplick, and Rice, 2015). 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Many persons with IDDs struggle with verbal expression. Therefore, 
shifting the narrative surrounding ableist societal value judgements 
placed unfairly on persons with IDDs, while exploring efforts towards 
cognitive accessibility, requires looking towards non-verbal means by 
which to convey feelings, emotions and expressions of self-worth (Girija 
& Gerber, 2007; Lister, Tanguay, Snow & D’Amico, 2009; Treadon, Rosal 
& Wylder, 2006). According to Dorothy Atkinson (2004), Professor of 
Learning Disability in the School of Health and Social Welfare at Open 
University, all people, regardless of disability, think about their lives and 
the direction that they want their life to follow. Atkinson (2004) further 
states that, “life experiences, and the opportunity to tell them, are 
particularly important for people with learning disabilities, because 
often they have been silent, or silenced, while other people---families, 
practitioners, historians---have spoken on their behalf.” 
For many people with intellectual disabilities, the artmaking process is 
one that provides a means by which to express feelings and emotions 
in a socially acceptable, non-verbal manner. (Got and Cheng, 2008; 
Kanareff, 2002; Luftig, 1987). Artmaking might help persons with IDDs, 
especially when promoted in the context of the therapeutic 
relationship, such as in art therapy (Got and Cheng, 2008; Roberts, 
Camic, & Springham, 2011). Many such art therapy programs exist for 
IDDs in clinical settings (Roberts, et al., 2011). Recently, mental health 
services, as well as services that assist with social skills for this 
community, have begun to move art therapy programs away from 
segregated clinical settings, towards shared, socially inclusive spaces, 
such as museums, in order to further remove the social stigma of their 
disabilities (Roberts et al., 2011). Museums and gallery spaces are seen 
by many as less stigmatizing environments for therapeutic 
programming, as they are far removed from hospital settings (Roberts 
et al., 2011). In fact, museums and other gallery settings might be 
particularly beneficial for those with IDDs, as they offer additional 
opportunities for social engagement and community participation 
(Colbert, Cooke, Camic & Springham, 2013).  But even as museums 
work towards creating programming that meets the needs of their 
diverse communities, there is insufficient information on the nature 
and impact of these programs (Peacock, 2012). 
 
Purpose Statement 
The purpose of this research is to examine art-making programming 
for persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities in art 
museum settings. 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research Questions 
There are four questions that guide this research study: 
1.   In what ways are visitors with IDDs served by museums? 
2.   What are the opportunities and barriers for implementing programs 
for persons with IDDs in art museum settings? 
3.   Who are the stakeholders for programs for persons with IDDs in art 
museum settings and how are they supported? 
4.   How is success measured for programs for persons with IDDs in art 
museum settings? 
 
Background 
When developing their 2016-20 strategic plan, the American Alliance of 
Museums’ (AAM) (2018) Board of Directors and leadership team 
surveyed 485,000 museum professionals to determine the issues most 
vital in maintaining the museum industry’s relevance and sustainability.  
The issues presented as a result of this study were a need for more 
diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion (DEAI) across the industry, 
both in organizational structures as well as in program offerings (AAM, 
2018). Museum professionals also stated that the obstacles they faced 
in DEAI work within their institutions were, money, staff capacity, and 
time (AAM, 2018). Additionally, museum professionals expressed a 
need for more professional development resources, training, examples, 
templates, and case studies, in order to meet these goals (AAM, 2018). 
AAM (2018) defines accessibility as, “giving equitable access to everyone 
along the continuum of human ability and experience. Accessibility 
encompasses the broader meanings of compliance and refers to how 
organizations make space for the characteristics that each person 
brings.” With this definition in mind, art museums across the nation, 
are taking efforts to benefit and serve the diversity of their 
communities, rather than merely serving as bastions for the elite. 
These efforts include developing targeted programs to serve 
underserved members of their communities, reimagining collections 
that are representative of diverse audiences, increasing efforts towards 
more inclusive hiring practices, and the creation of community advisory 
boards to assist in institutional DEAI initiatives (Marxen, 2009). 
For years, museums have demonstrated their public value as 
educational providers, community anchors, and stewards of our 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
national heritage (American Alliance of Museums, 2019). As art 
museums answer the call towards becoming more accessible 
community anchors, many are looking to expand their program 
offerings to better serve community members with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities. Many art museums are meeting this 
challenge by providing sensory related activities and specialized tours 
for those with sensory sensitivities. Many provide special hours, in 
which stimuli, such as lighting, loud sounds and big crowds are toned 
down or removed, which has proven to be an effective method of 
serving visitors with sensory sensitivities (Shrikant, 2018). However, 
persons with IDDs are not a monolith, and not all persons with IDDs 
have sensory sensitivities. Providing sensory hours is only one means 
of meeting persons with IDDs, a community that has a wide array of 
needs. According to Lani Florian (2008), Professor of Social and 
Educational Inclusion at the University of Aberdeen, “while the concept 
of social inclusion is now a widely accepted notion, the challenge for 
cultural institutions is to develop programs, practices, and services that 
support the diversity of users’ learning needs, especially for those with 
physical and developmental disabilities. 
A number of major galleries and museums within the United States and 
internationally, including The National Gallery of Australia in Sydney, 
the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City, and Tate Britain 
in London have begun to implement art therapy programming, in order 
to meet the diverse learning needs of their visitors with IDDs (Roberts 
et al., 2011). Art therapy is uniquely appropriate when working with 
persons with IDDs, as many within this community struggle with verbal 
communication; and, art in any form offers a means of non- verbal 
expression (Got & Cheng, 2008). Art therapy is also an effective means 
of teaching social skills, as well as soft skills, when used in combination 
with other therapies intended to reduce challenging behavior, often 
related to verbal limitations (Lister et al., 2009). 
While research validates the benefits of art therapy for persons with 
IDDs, there is a gap in literature that speaks directly to designing and 
facilitating art therapy programming within the museum and gallery 
setting for persons with IDDs (Aguilar, 2019; Got & Cheng, 2008; Lister 
et al., 2009; Noble, 2001). This gap in the literature exists for a number 
of reasons. For one, persons with IDDs are generally involved in 
research conducted through the medical model of disability, which 
focuses on impairment and differences (Cousik, Mishra, and Rang, 
2017). This is in opposition to the social model of disability, which was 
developed by disabled persons, and asserts that people are disabled by 
barriers in society, not by their impairment or differences (Mykitiuk et 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al., 2015). Additionally, due to ethical concerns, persons with IDDs are 
rarely included in formative or summative measures of evaluation of 
such programming. This exclusion eliminates vital first-hand insight 
(Cousik et al., 2017). But ultimately, in the case of art museum 
programming, those tasked with designing and facilitating programs 
for this community, most of the time, do not have the special needs 
that they are researching. Therefore, with these gaps in mind, this 
multi-site case study is intended to lend some insight into potential 
best practices for further designing and implementation of specialized 
programming for persons with IDDs, within the art museum setting. 
 
 
The research used a multi-site case study approach and purposive 
sampling to identify 4 case study sites. Sites were selected based on 
whether the art museum fulfilled the following criteria: programming 
that is designed specifically for persons with IDDs, programming that 
has existed for a minimum of ten years (thus, allowing for established 
relationships between participants and facilitators), programming that 
is designed to encourage discussion and participation from participants 
within the galleries as well as in the classroom, and finally, 
programming that has remained active, despite the global pandemic. In 
total, 6 art museums were identified as fitting these criteria; the 
researcher contacted all 6 art museums; 4 art museums and 5 
facilitators agreed to participate in the study. 
Data was initially collected by reviewing articles, videos and webpages 
related to programming for persons with IDDs at each case study site. 
Data was then supplemented with responses provided via semi-
structured interviews of educators and teaching specialists facilitating 
programming for persons with IDDs at each site. The interview 
instrument consisted of 16 questions, asked verbally via Zoom. In turn, 
transcripts from the Zoom interviews were analyzed using emergent 
coding, in order to highlight themes and subthemes that arose in 
response to the 4 research questions outlined above. 
At each institution, the researcher asked each person to explain their 
roles within their institution, but names and identifying information 
were to remain anonymous. Job titles of participants varied across 
institutions and ranged from Associate Museum Educator to Manager 
of Accessibility to Teaching Specialist. 
1. Museum 1 is a large art museum in the state of New York. 
Following the passage of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, this 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
museum began piloting programs for adults and children with 
developmental disabilities. This museum offers programming 
for visitors with varying physical and cognitive disabilities; their 
programming for persons with IDDs consists of a series of 
workshops that have been running for 34 years. Before the 
pandemic, nearly 650 persons participated in 24 workshops per 
year (Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2020), provided free of 
charge, for persons with IDDs along with their friends and family 
members. The workshops are held one day a month and are 
split into two sessions, dependent on the ages of participants. 
2. Museum 2 is a mid-sized art museum in the state of Ohio. This 
museum introduced accessibility programming in 2011, 
beginning with offering touch tours for visitors with visual 
impairments, American Sign Language tours for visitors with 
hearing impairments, and programming designed for adult 
visitors with developmental disabilities (Zumbiel, 2019). After 
consulting with community partners, the museum discovered 
that they had a gap in their program offerings, leading them to 
design additional programming to serve children with IDDs as 
well as their friends and family members. Pre-pandemic, a total 
of 8 programs for persons with IDDs were hosted monthly, free 
of charge, facilitated by a single educator. Unlike Museum 1, 
Museum 2 does not have a full-time accessibility department or 
position. 
3. Museum 3 is a large-scale art museum in the state of New York. 
This museum has been serving visitors with varying disabilities 
since 1945, when they introduced programming for disabled 
veterans. In 2005, Museum 3 noted a lack of programming for 
adults with IDDs in general, which inspired them to create 
programming for both children, as well as adults with IDDs, 
adding additional programming for teens with IDDs in 2015 
(Museum of Modern Art, 2019). The programming is offered free 
of charge, one Sunday a month, with differing time ranges 
dependent on visitors age levels. Museum 3 has an accessibility 
department consisting of 5 full-time staff members, as well as 
numerous teaching artists who facilitate all access programs. In 
addition to programming designed for in-gallery discussion, 
Museum 3 employs 2 full-time staff who focus on access 
partnerships and community organizations serving additional 
persons with IDDs. 
4. Museum 4 is a large-scale art museum in the state of Texas. 
Museum 4 works in collaboration with approximately 20 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different community partners and day habilitation facilities, in 
providing monthly programming for persons with IDDs. 
Museum 4 has been providing programming for both children 
and adults with IDDs, free of charge for over a decade. Museum 
4 considers accessibility to be a full-time salaried position, for 
one person, who is then assisted by teaching specialists in 
facilitating both in-gallery IDD programming, as well as off-site 
IDD programming. 
 
Limitations 
The limitations of this research study were numerous, due to the fact 
that this research study coincided with a global pandemic. To begin 
with, the researcher had intended to interview more institutions and 
more than one educator or teaching artist per case study site. However, 
as a result of the pandemic, many institutions discontinued their IDD-
related programming, as persons with IDDs are considered a high-risk 
group. Additionally, many institutions, including the case study sites, 
had begun the painful process of eliminating entire departments and 
furloughing large portions of their front-facing educational staff, 
including teaching artists.  This eliminated many of the institutions that 
the researcher could include in their research. In addition, where the 
researcher had hoped to interview facilitators in person, interviews 
pivoted to Zoom, in order to ensure the safety of all involved, thus 
eliminating opportunities for the researcher to observe programs, visit 
classroom spaces, or interact with participants, or additional 
facilitators. Where the researcher would have liked to include 
conversations with participants of the programs, the researcher was 
not granted that opportunity, due to the ethical and potential physical 
risks of working with a high-risk group during this unprecedented time. 
 
 
RQ1: In what ways are visitors with IDDs served by museums? 
Three themes characterized the art museum programming studied 
across all four case study sites: 1. Audience; 2. Delivery; and 3. 
Facilitation. 
 
Audience 
All four case study museums provide programming for different age 
groups: children, teens and adults. Museums 1, 2, and 3 host their 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programming one day a month, with separate time slots for varying age 
intervals. Museum 4 facilitates programming for approximately 20 
different community partnerships and day habilitation facilities, 
catering to the specific needs of each partnership, regarding frequency, 
thematic content and age level of participants. 
While all four case study sites provide programming for adults with 
IDDs, Museums 1 and 3 expressed in their interview responses that 
their institution had specifically designed programming for adults with 
IDD, in response to what they viewed as a great need. Museum 3 
explained, “we knew that there aren’t as many opportunities for adults 
with IDDs to have social and cultural experiences. For kids, there are 
more opportunities in school to connect, but for adults, we really found 
that there weren’t that many opportunities for social engagement and 
engagement around the arts.”  By creating programs tailored for adults 
with IDDs, all four case study sites are in a unique position to provide 
much needed experiences for adults with IDDs to foster a sense of 
connection through art-based programming. 
Additionally, all four case study museums provided ways for families to 
connect and enjoy creating together. They explained that the goal when 
designing programs for persons with IDDs is to first provide a space for 
socialization, and then, connection with the arts. Museum 2 clarified 
that the intention is not to “separate [persons with IDDs] from the rest 
of our program, or the rest of the museum. We want them to be a part 
of whatever they feel comfortable with. We felt these programs were a 
necessary step for some families who might not feel comfortable, being 
with the general public…the hope is for them to feel comfortable 
coming on their own, without any program needed in the future.” 
Therefore, the ultimate goal is for the IDD programming to become a 
‘stepping-stone’ for families to explore the museum independently, 
once the museum feels more approachable to them. 
 
Delivery 
The researcher asked the four case study museums to describe the 
nature of their current program offerings for persons with IDDs and 
what content is included in the programs they provide. To begin with, 
as large-scale museums, Museums 1 and 3 begin their IDD 
programming in the classrooms, so as to provide a quiet space for their 
participants to ground themselves and adjust to the experience before 
entering the louder, more chaotic gallery spaces. Once within the 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gallery spaces, program goals varied across all four case study sites due 
to differing collections and diverse needs of partnering facilities. 
When discussing time spent in the galleries, Museum 1 responded that 
a goal of their IDD programming is to work on “social skills or soft 
skills”. Museum 1 suggested that when working with non-verbal 
audiences, placing an emphasis on communication and socialization 
might require additional modes of communication. For example, 
communication through writing, through communication devices, and 
working through questions by going from open- ended to close-ended 
questions, were suggested. 
Museum 4 shares this goal in pushing communication within their IDD 
programming. However, they added that the ultimate goal of this push 
for communication, is to create opportunities for their participants to 
build connections between the collections and their own lived 
experiences. “That’s what’s really important to me…not about if they 
memorize when a work of art was made, or who made it. it’s more 
about them finding a personal way to make meaning of what’s on 
view.” The interviewee suggested incorporating games using sensory 
tools related to different sensory elements in the art being discussed, in 
conjunction with discussion- based questions, as an effective means of 
encouraging participation and communication, among visitors with 
IDDs. 
When discussing time spent in the classrooms, each case study site 
seeks to create a fun and accessible studio environment, yet each site 
adopts varying approaches to accomplish this goal. For example, 
Museum 1 explained that a hallmark of their artmaking programming is 
to build artistic skills. For this reason, Museum 1 focuses on fostering a 
sense of experimentation by providing participants with an array of 
media and technique. Facilitators then encourage participants to 
imitate the movements necessary to accomplish the artistic technique 
featured through discussion and visual modeling. Museum 3 adopts a 
similar approach, while providing participants with sophisticated 
materials that closely mimic the art process of the artist being 
discussed, in order to “[provide] an exciting experience to challenge 
[participants] to create together and to find joy in that moment.” 
Museum 4, on the other hand, explained that the artmaking activity is 
intended to prioritize process and exploration over creating a final 
product that mimics the work of the artists featured in the gallery visit. 
For this reason, participants are given art supplies to use in non- 
traditional ways, such as using yarn as a vehicle for acrylic paints. By 
doing so, Museum 4 creates a fun environment that fosters a sense of 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimentation with a goal that is less concerned with building skills 
and more focused on building confidence, regardless of ability. 
 
Facilitation 
Across all case sites, programs were designed to be facilitated within 
the museum galleries and studio/classroom spaces. However, two case 
study sites actively design and facilitate IDD specific programming 
outside of the museum. These sites have partnered with varying 
residential and day habilitation facilities that are not able to visit the 
museum in person. Either the museum itself is inaccessible or the 
participants in care at the facilities are unable to visit due to varying 
needs. In these cases, the case study sites have found success in 
sending their cohort of teaching artists and/or contractual educators to 
these sites to facilitate these programs in person, or rather ‘bring the 
museum’ to them. 
This arrangement was instrumental in deciding how to continuously 
serve this community when the pandemic made it impossible to 
continue hosting programming in the museum galleries. Museums 2, 3, 
and 4 pivoted towards creating art kits with accompanying image heavy 
instructions that included open-ended questions for caregivers at the 
care facilities to assist in guiding participants through the projects. 
Once again, the goal was to provide fun art- making opportunities for 
the participants to do alongside caregivers, while also encouraging 
participatory conversation guides to encourage conversation and social 
skills. Museum 1 has pivoted towards this model, with the exception 
that their programming is still facilitated within the galleries by the 
same educators that facilitated before the pandemic, while the 
participants attend via zoom and create art-making projects using 
supplies they already have on hand. 
 
RQ2: What are the opportunities and barriers for programs for 
persons with IDDs in art museum settings? 
Across all four case study sites, when discussing the opportunities, as 
well as the barriers presented, main themes were found through: 1. 
Partnerships, 2. Funding, and 3. Logistics. 
 
Partnerships 
Across all case study sites, all interviewees admitted that partnerships 
were beneficial in providing opportunities throughout the entire 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process. Museum 2 explained that, in fact, their program started when 
an institution that serves persons with IDDs reached out, asking the 
museum to design a program for them. Whereas Museum 4 expressed 
that partnerships have been a great way to leverage the resources of 
their community. Ultimately, all case study sites have found that their 
partnerships with community partners and care facilities have made 
scheduling and organizing programs much easier. 
One of the key goals in designing programs for persons with IDDs, is of 
building community. Museum 2 reflected that the disability community 
has a saying, “by us, for us”. By partnering with community 
organizations, day habilitation centers, day club facilities, residential 
facilities and various other community partnerships that serve persons 
with IDDs within their communities, the case study sites have been able 
to build relationships, as well as gain the approval of the community 
that their institution is wanting to serve, as they feel involved in the 
process. Additionally, Museum 4 remarked that when planning 
programming that fits the needs of persons with IDDs, the institutions’ 
marketing department may not initially understand how to successfully 
market the new program offerings; therefore, community partners 
have also been instrumental in advertising the new offerings 
effectively. 
Lastly, all case study sites highly recommended involving community 
advisory boards. The overwhelming advice across all case study sites 
was to partner with experts in the field, partner with the participants 
themselves, and partner with parents of younger participants from the 
very beginning stages of your planning process. Partnering with your 
community during the initial planning process will save you a lot of 
time. Museum 4 expressed, “if you’re thinking of starting a program, 
begin by asking [your community groups, care facilities, and 
participants] what they are interested in…asking them what their 
perfect program would be…because why spend years trying to figure it 
out…when the people that already know what they want, are more 
than willing to give you the information.” 
 
Funding 
Museum 4 also expressed that support through local grant funders has 
been instrumental in offering these programs free of charge; therefore, 
truly making these programs accessible to all. The interviewee 
expressed that money is a barrier and they encouraged museums that 
want to provide programming for persons with IDDs to not worry about 
funding. “Don’t worry about the funding. I think that that’s something 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that really gets in the way of museums from taking on new things. [But] 
people want to support programs like this. The payoff for them will 
vary…but you will find financial support for these [program offerings]. 
While Museum 4 provided words of encouragement that your 
institution will be able to acquire funding in order to provide free 
admission to your IDD program offerings, ultimately, across all four 
case study sites, there are many more resources and offerings that 
would be attainable if more money were allotted for IDD related 
accessible programming. Sites expressed that there is an endless 
demand for accessible programming, but there is not an endless supply 
of staff to facilitate these programs. Additionally, sites expressed a 
desire for staff members that are fluent in non-English languages, 
including ASL, admitting that it would be beneficial to include ASL 
interpreters, as well as non-native English-speaking staff across all 
program offerings. In addition to interpreters, sites expressed a need 
for image-heavy instructions, maps and timetables for IDD 
programming, an additional accessibility best practice that requires 
additional funding. 
 
Logistics 
Logistics was another theme that arose when discussing barriers with 
all four case study sites, beginning with the museum sites themselves 
being inaccessible. All four case study sites were museums located in 
older buildings with limited wheelchair access. Some museums have 
galleries that are inaccessible, while Museum 2 is located on a hill, 
which is not frequented by public transportation. Therefore, accessing 
the museum is, in itself a barrier. 
All sites have been able to provide free admission because of support 
from local grant funders. However, parking and transportation to and 
from day habilitation and community centers still need to be waived in 
order to make the program fully accessible. Both Museums 2 and 4, 
expressed an additional desire to acquire a vehicle that could bring the 
participants to the museum, rather than sending teaching artists to the 
participants. However, accomplishing this desire, will require additional 
funding. 
In addition, all four case study sites expressed capacity to be a barrier, 
as all programs are vying for the same classroom space. In these 
instances, there may be more demand for accessible programming, yet 
the museums do not yet have access to more classroom space. Timing 
is another barrier for the large-scale museums, as they communicated 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a need to find a time that was convenient for families to come together 
for social connection, while also needing that time to be one, that is not 
overwhelming for participants with sensory sensitivities. 
Lastly, one of the major barriers for the case study sites is found in the 
fact that there is very little representation in their museum’s collections. 
Of the four case study sites, only Museum 3 has a work of art created 
by a person with an IDD as part of their permanent, current display. 
Two of the four case study sites recalled having works of art in their 
permanent collection that were part of temporary exhibits that had 
been created by persons with IDDs, as well as works of art created by 
persons with physical disabilities. Across all four case study sites, the 
interviewees expressed this lack of representation as an important 
talking point that they wanted to see improved. They expressed the 
need for cooperation from curators, and additional departments, in 
order to acquire new works of art that would bring in more much 
needed IDD representation. 
Museum 3 told a story, that expresses the importance of 
representation within a museum’s collection, wherein a visitor who 
frequents their institutions’ accessible programming asked them, as 
facilitator, if there were any works of art created by a person with Down 
syndrome. 
“One of the participants was asking, is there anyone 
with Down syndrome in [this museum’s] collection. And 
she herself, has Down syndrome. And I was like, yeah-
there is! Her name is Judith Scott. Here’s her work. And 
it was so impactful and beautiful. And I personally just 
feel very lucky to work at a museum that has such a 
diverse collection and that we can share that work with 
other people and really expand peoples’ ideas of 
modern contemporary art and [who is represented] in a 
museum.” 
 
RQ3: Who are the stakeholders for programs for persons with IDDs 
in art museum settings and how are they supported? 
When the researcher inquired about the stakeholders of the artmaking 
programs for persons with IDDs across all four case study sites, the 
obvious answers were given: the participants, the friends, family and 
caretakers of the participants, the art museum educators, teaching 
artists, community partners, etc. However, when the interviewees 
began discussing the trainings that their institution provided for all staff 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involved in the designing, planning and facilitation of the programming, 
it was clear that all case study sites believed in a holistic approach to 
accessibility, in believing that all front-facing staff benefited from the 
training and conversations that took place when designing, planning 
and facilitating truly accessible programming. Additionally, Museum 1 
expressed that non-disabled visitors will benefit from accessibility best 
practices that are set into place due to the initial design of IDD 
programs. “…we found that these accommodations, while we’ve made 
them for this specific group of people, it’s really helping the general 
public.” Therefore, by ensuring that all departments in your institution 
make accessibility a priority, you are ensuring that your entire 
community benefits, once you ensure that the accessibility needs of 
persons with IDDs are met, and they are given ‘a seat at the table.’ 
When the researcher asked the case study sites how the stakeholders 
were supported in their institution, two themes arose across all four 
case study sites: 1) Stakeholders of accessible programming are 
supported by hosting consistent training sessions; and 2) Accessible 
programming is supported by a holistic approach to accessibility across 
the entire institution. 
 
Consistent training sessions 
Responses varied among the case study sites as to frequency of 
trainings. Most held trainings led by a consultant once a year; whereas 
at least one museum mentioned having monthly trainings for access 
docents specifically. What was common across all four case study sites 
was the need to bring in a consultant, expert, community partner and 
at least one participant of their accessible program offerings to lead the 
training sessions. 
None of the persons interviewed for this research study admitted to 
having any formal experience in special education or art therapy 
practices. A common response across all interviewees, was that they 
felt qualified to work with this community due to training received 
during internships, time spent under a supervisor responsible for the 
programs, and trainings received through collaborations with 
community partners, experts and conversations with participants and 
their family members. 
 
Holistic approach 
Museum 3 expressed that a goal in the trainings that take place at their 
institution, is born out of a desire to “break attitudinal barriers” that 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visitors with disabilities face when visiting their museum. In order to 
break these barriers, it was essential for trainings to include 
representatives from all front-facing departments of the museum. The 
thought process behind including a representative from each front-
facing department, is that accessibility should not just be a goal of the 
access programs team at your institution. 
In order to meet this goal of having a holistic approach to accessibility 
within their institution, interviewees across all four case study sites 
include representatives from visitor services, security from their 
institutions’ gift shops and cafés in accessibility training initiatives, in 
order to break attitudinal barriers faced by visitors with IDDs. Museum 
3 includes first-hand interviews from participants in these trainings, in 
order for visitors with IDDs to express situations in which they would 
prefer to be addressed first, rather than their caretaker, or for parents 
of younger visitors with IDDs, to express their desire to not be more 
closely monitored in the galleries by security, as this causes them to 
feel unwelcome in gallery spaces, outside of accessibility specific 
programming. And lastly, Museum 1 includes members of HR in 
trainings and in planning meetings in which persons with IDDs were 
contributors, in order to assist HR in knowing how to proceed with 
hiring persons with IDDs, to provide more diversity and inclusive 
museum job opportunities, which is another goal of advocates for 
disability justice. 
 
RQ4: How is success measured for programs for persons with IDDs 
in art museum settings? 
In order to approach this question, the interviewer asked all four case 
study sites to explain both the quantitative and qualitative methods 
they use to evaluate their program offerings for persons with IDDs. And 
then, in turn, asked them to express the ways in which they believe 
successful outcomes from these program offerings manifests. 
 
How to measure success 
More than one museum professional explained that they know their 
program is successful when they receive qualitative, open-ended 
responses from the participants and their family members and 
caregivers through post-visit surveys. They stated that they believe 
hearing about their IDD program offerings spoken about in positive 
terms from their participants’ caregivers, as well as from their teaching 
artists, to be a tangible measure of success. 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Museum 4 utilizes quantitative measurements, such as number of 
programs per year, attendance numbers, and tracking of zip codes, in 
order to qualify for IMLS grants. Moreover, Museums 2, 3 and 4, 
explained that they conduct summative evaluations for every program, 
while Museum 1, conducts formative and summative evaluations only 
when trying something new, as their accessible programming has been 
in place for over 34 years. 
 
The successful outcome 
When the researcher asked the interviewees, how they personally 
measure the success of their museum’s accessible programming for 
persons with IDD, they were met with similar responses. 
Museum 1: “…that’s kind of the magic, that happens 
here is that you are building some familiarity with the 
museum, so that young person can…come back to the 
museum on their own or with their family and [they] 
know that it is a place where they are welcome…” 
Museum 2: “…the fact that we have regulars for a 
program shows that these families really care about the 
program and are happy with it.” 
Museum 3: “…to have this community of people keep 
on wanting to connect with us and come and connect 
with each other and the museum, is a metric of success 
for us in how committed people are to come into the 
program, year after year.” 
Museum 4: “…we’ve seen them, plan tours for their 
families where they come, and they are the tour guide 
and show their families around. That’s something that, I 
really love to see.” 
Ultimately, across all four case study sites, the resounding response 
was that you will know that your program is a success when you have 
effectively created a museum culture that makes accessibility a priority, 
so that your participants return, even on non-program days, because 
they feel they have agency over their own museum experience. As 
Museum 4 said, programs are to set the stage and help persons with 
IDD to feel welcome. And you will know that your program is 
successful, when your participants keep coming back and when they 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 18 
 
 
 
 
 
Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
want to come back with friends and family on non-program days 
because the museum has become a welcoming and inclusive space. 
 
 
This research study was established in the belief that persons with IDDs 
are valuable citizens in our modern-day society and that more care 
should be taken to ensure that our society deems cognitive accessibility 
to be a worthy pursuit. The research study aimed to understand what 
actions art museums are taking, to meet the accessibility needs of 
persons with IDDs, and what museum professionals have learned in 
engaging with this community. While the review of literature suggests 
that art therapy within museums has been an effective means of 
reaching this community, widespread knowledge, utilization and 
understanding of this communities’ diverse accessibility needs remains 
limited. However, according to art therapist Karen Peacock, offering art 
therapy as a means of furthering your museums’ mission to increase 
DEAI is key when developing innovative partnerships between art 
therapy and museums (Peacock, 2012). 
Due to the pandemic, this multi-site case study offers limited insight 
into the gaps in knowledge of art museum best practices involving 
programming for persons with IDDs; therefore, further research with a 
larger sample size is recommended. However, with this limited insight 
in mind, from conversations with 5 museum professionals across four 
case study sites, two key recommendations emerged: 1. Partner with 
community organizations serving individuals with IDDs and 2. Adopt a 
holistic approach to accessibility across your entire institution. 
Interviewees were unanimous in touting the benefits of community 
partnerships. Interviewees designed programming through 
collaborations with community organizations, created advisory boards 
consisting of participants, as well as experts in the field, and leveraged 
partnerships for resources, first-hand knowledge, and even funding. 
Secondly, interviewees recommended adopting a holistic approach to 
accessibility. In summarizing the responses across all four case study 
sites, the researcher recommends including museum professionals 
directly working with accessibility within your institution: members of 
access programs departments, access educators, and teaching artists 
that facilitate access programming. Additionally, the researcher 
recommends including educators and facilitators of programming not 
in the accessibility department, as access training can benefit these 
museum professionals due to the fact that accessibility best practices 
benefit a wider audience than just those that identify as having 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disabilities. Ultimately, in order for an institution to successfully center 
DEAI, the responses seem to indicate that accessibility cannot simply be 
the responsibility of an accessibility department or of a single teaching 
specialist. This means that, ideally, museums should be considering 
accessibility in their exhibit design, wall labeling, collections, and HR 
initiatives, in addition to educational programming and special events. 
And responses from interviewees seem to support that if all museum 
offerings were to become accessible, then persons with IDDs would 
have agency over which programs they would like to participate in, thus 
making the entire museum a safe and welcoming space for persons 
with disabilities, including those with IDDs. And it is this very goal, that 
advocates for disability justice are calling on museums to accomplish. 
While this case study will serve to contribute to our understanding of 
programming for persons with IDDs, in order to fill the gaps in our 
knowledge and understanding of the diverse needs of persons with 
IDDs formative and summative evaluation of programming is 
imperative. So often, researchers, evaluators and museum educators 
do not have the special needs of the community they are serving. For 
this reason, they rely on qualitative means of gathering responses from 
parents of younger participants and caregivers of older, non-verbal 
participants. However, Cousik, Mishra, and Rang (2017) speak to the 
fact that, “research is often conducted on persons with disabilities 
rather than with”. Therefore, in order to lend authenticity and 
credibility to your research, Cousik et al. (2017) recommend creating an 
inclusive and accessible means of gathering both quantitative as well as 
qualitative data from participants with IDDs, in order to provide a more 
accurate, meaningful and powerful tool to assist in understanding the 
diverse needs of this community. 
And lastly, during the course of this case study, the global pandemic 
caused museums to shift their program offerings to virtual platforms. 
Museums that took this approach were forced to pivot their 
programming, with little notice or time for formative evaluation. 
However, despite the rush to do so, many museum educators have 
found positive opportunities from these virtual experiences. J.V. 
Maranto, Manager of Teen and Family Programs at the Museum of Arts 
and Design in New York City, speaks to some of the unexpected 
upsides of virtual learning: “What I love about Zoom and Google 
Classroom is that folks from all over the world can access our programs 
and attend our events. In addition, capacity is increased. In person, we 
might only be able to have 40 visitors participate in a program, but in a 
virtual setting, we can accommodate hundreds.” She also points out 
that virtual programming “allows folks to learn on their own terms” with 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
help from closed captioning and instructions piped directly into their 
headphones (Akers, 2021). While pivoting to virtual program offerings 
eliminated many of the social benefits of in-gallery conversations and 
experiences, post-pandemic, many museums are beginning to see the 
advantages to sustaining online programming. For many museums, 
virtual programming has created solutions to institutional barriers 
related to funding, capacity and modes of communication. 
Vanessa Chang (2020), co-curator of “Recoding CripTech”, a 
multidisciplinary art exhibition at SOMArts Cultural Center in San 
Francisco, speaks to the future of technology in a post-pandemic 
reality, “I really hope that we learn from this year…that this will cause us 
to reflect on what’s really worth saving and what’s really worth 
transforming. In terms of accessibility, how can we understand and 
have a more capacious understanding of technology and space and 
time that we move forward from with this pandemic?” (Wong, Felt, & 
Chang, 2021, 22:00) With this consideration in mind, the researcher 
suggests that it would be beneficial for museums that have chosen to 
provide virtual programming for persons with IDDs to facilitate 
summative evaluation of these virtual programs in order to inform 
museum professionals moving forward, as we look to determine what 
accessibility best practices will look like in a post- pandemic reality. 
 
 
Aguilar, S. (2019). Art Therapy in a Museum Setting for Adults with 
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities: A Literature Review. 
Expressive Therapies Capstone Theses. 
https://digitalcommons.lesley.edu/expressive_theses/112 
Akers, T. (2021). What Does Museum Education Look Like in A Post-
COVID World? Jing Culture and Commerce. Retrieved from 
https://jingculturecommerce.com/museum- education-post-covid/ 
American Alliance of Museums. (2018). Facing Change: Insights from 
AAM’s DEAI Working Group. Retrieved from https://www.aam-
us.org/programs/diversity-equity-accessibility- and-inclusion/facing-
change/ 
American Alliance of Museums. (2019). Museums, Health, and Wellness 
Compendium. Retrieved from https://www.aam-
us.org/programs/about-museums/museums-health-and- wellness-
compendium/ 
American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities. 
(2021). FAQs on Intellectual Disability. Retrieved from 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.aaidd.org/intellectual- disability/definition/faqs-on-
intellectual-disability 
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-336, § 1, 104 
Stat. 328 (1990). 
Atkinson, D. (2004) Research and Empowerment: Involving People with 
Learning Difficulties in Oral and Life History Research. Disability & 
Society, 19:7, 691-702. Retrieved from DOI: 
10.1080/0968759042000284187 
Barnes, C. (1997). A Legacy of Oppression: A History of Disability in 
Western Culture. In L. Barton and M. Oliver (Eds), Disability Studies: 
Past, Present and Future (pp. 3-24). Leeds, UK: The Disability Press. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Basics About 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/facts.html 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021a). Developmental 
Disabilities. Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/developmentaldisabilities/ 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021b). Facts about Down 
Syndrome. Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/downsyndrome.html 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021c). What is Fragile X 
Syndrome (FXS)? Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fxs/facts.html 
Colbert, S., Cooke, A., Camic, P. M., & Springham, N. (2013). The Art-
Gallery as a Resource for Recovery for People Who Have 
Experienced Psychosis. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 40(2), 250-256. 
Cousik, R., Mishra, P., & Rang, M. K. (2017). Writing With the “Other”: 
Combining Poetry and Participation to Study Leaders with 
Disabilities. The Qualitative Report, 22(11), 3039- 3054. 
Disability Justice. (2020). Dehumanization, Discrimination, and 
Segregation. Retrieved from https://disabilityjustice.org/justice-
denied/dehumanization-discrimination-and- segregation/ 
Expanding Your Market: Maintaining Accessibility in Museums. (2009). 
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Retrieved from 
https://www.ada.gov/business/museum_access.htm#r4 
Metropolitan Museum of Art. (2020) Discoveries at 30: Exhibition 
Overview. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved from 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 22 
https://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2018/discoveries-
at-30 
Girija, M. A. K., & Gerber, N. (2007). Impressions Over Time: Community 
Progressive Murals in an Outpatient HIV/AIDS Clinic. The Arts in 
Psychotherapy, 34(2), 151–162. 
Got, I. L. S, & Cheng, S. T. (2008) The Effects of Art Facilitation on the 
Social Functioning of People with Developmental Disability, Art 
Therapy, 25(1), 32-37, Retrieved from DOI: 
10.1080/07421656.2008.10129347 
Florian, L. 2008. “Special or Inclusive Education: Future Trends.” British 
Journal of Special Education 35(4): 202–8. 
Kanareff, R. L. (2002). Utilizing Group Art Therapy to Enhance the Social 
Skills of Children with Autism and Down Syndrome. Retrieved from 
ProQuest Digital Dissertations. (UMI No. 1408034). 
Lister, S., Tanguay, D., Snow, S., & D’Amico, M. (2009). Development of a 
Creative Arts Therapies Center for People with Developmental 
Disabilities. Art Therapy: Journal of the American Art Therapy 
Association. 26(1), 34-37. Retrieved from 
doi:0.1080/07421656.2009.10129316 
Luftig, R. L. (1987). Teaching the Mentally Retarded Student: Curriculum, 
Methods, and Strategies. Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Marxen, E. (2009). Therapeutic Thinking in Contemporary Art: Or 
Psychotherapy in the Arts. Arts in Psychotherapy, 36(3), 131-139. 
Museum of Modern Art. (2019). Create Ability. Museum of Modern Art. 
Retrieved from https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/5070 
Mykitiuk, R., Chaplick, A., & Rice, C. (2015). Beyond Normative Ethics: 
Ethics of Arts-Based Disability Research. Ethics, Medicine and Public 
Health, I, 373-382. 
Noble, J. (2001). Art as an Instrument for Creating Social Reciprocity: 
Social Skills Group for Children with Autism. In S. Riley (Ed.), Group 
Process Made Visible: Group Art Therapy. (pp. 82–114). Philadelphia: 
Brunner-Routledge. 
Peacock, K. (2012). Museum Education and Art Therapy: Exploring an 
Innovative Partnership. Art Therapy, 29(3), 133–137. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421656.2012.701604 
Roberts, S., Camic, P. M., & Springham, N. (2011). New Roles for Art 
Galleries: Art Viewing as a Community Intervention for Family Carers 

https://uw.manifoldapp.org/projects/museums-forward  
MuseumsForward 1(1) (2021) • 23 
 
of People with Mental Health Problems. Arts and Health 3(2), 146-
159, Retrieved from DOI: 10.1080/17533015.2011.561360 
Shrikant, A. (2018, January 5). How Museums Are Becoming More 
Sensory-Friendly for Those with Autism. Smithsonian Magazine. 
Retrieved from https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/how-
museums-are-becoming-more- sensory-friendly-for-those-with-
autism-180967740/ 
Treadon, C.B., Rosal, M., & Wylder, V.D.T. (2006). Opening the Doors of 
Art Museums for Therapeutic Processes. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 
33, 288–301. 
Wong, A. Felt, L.D. & Chang, V. (Hosts). (2021, February 7). Art and 
Technology (No. 96) [Audio podcast episode]. In Disability Visibility. 
Disability Visibility Project. 
https://disabilityvisibilityproject.com/2021/02/07/ep-96-art-and-
technology/ 
Zumbiel, M. (2019, February 25). StackPath. CityBeat.Com. Retrieved 
from https://www.citybeat.com/arts-culture/visual-
arts/blog/21048513/cincinnati-art-museum- looks-toward-
accessibility-with-a-new-front-entrance-ramp 

