Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework and 
Method for Accessibility in Thai Museums  
Kewalin Angkananon, Mike Wald, Lester Gilbert 
Electronic and Computer Science 
University of Southampton 
Southampton, UK 
ka3e10@ecs.soton.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— People with hearing impairments have difficulties 
in their access to Thai in situ authentic culture because they have 
problems with understanding spoken information during their 
visit. An extensive review of the literature found that there was 
no framework to guide developers in developing technology 
solutions for such face-to-face situations for people with hearing 
impairment, other disabilities or no disabilities. This paper 
describes a Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework (TEIF) 
and Method that have been shown by experiments and 
questionnaires to have the potential to help developers make local 
Thai museums more accessible for disabled visitors. The mean 
number of correct requirements was significantly higher for 
participants using the TEIF Method than the Other Methods. 
The TEIF Method helped developers select a solution 
significantly more often than the Other Methods that was not 
worse than a solution rated best by the experts. The TEIF 
Method also helped developers rate the best solution significantly 
closer to the experts’ ratings than the Other Methods.  
Keywords—museums; 
framework; 
method; 
accessibility; 
technology 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Thai culture is changing over time because of exposure to 
other nationalities whether face to face or through the Internet, 
television, or films. Small local Thai museums run by their 
owners help preserve Thai everyday culture in its original 
position or place by passing on knowledge and wisdom. 
Visiting such local museums is more realistic and authentic 
compared to an experience inside a large museum but there is 
less budget support from the government [1] so owners of such 
local sites often do not have enough funding to provide 
accessible information for hearing impaired people. People 
with hearing impairments have difficulties in their access to 
Thai in situ authentic culture because they have problems with 
understanding spoken or complex text information during their 
visit. There is more research into helping people with hearing 
impairments in their access to large museums compared to in 
situ authentic culture [2]. People with hearing loss of any age 
who know written language and use lip-reading to support their 
access to spoken language will in the future be an even larger 
group compared to sign language users as deaf people are now 
being fitted with cochlear implants to help improve their 
listening ability. Mather, Gregory, and Archbold [3] reported 
that 15 young people who had received sequential bilateral 
cochlear implants all found improvements in listening with the 
second implant, even those who did not carry on wearing it. 
There are also an increasing number of elderly people who 
have difficulties in hearing as they were approximately 12.5% 
of the population in 2010 and the percentage is predicted to 
peak at 20% by 2025 [4].  
In order to reduce discrimination in access to information in 
Thai local museums, technology developers need to produce 
technology solutions. There has, however, been no framework 
that has helped technology developers to consider all of the 
possible interactions that occur at the same time and in the 
same place although there have been projects concerned with 
how to use technology to support some of these interactions. 
Section II provides an example museum scenario illustrating 
the problems, section III reviews related frameworks, section 
IV explains the TEIF, section V explains the TEIF Method, 
section VI explains the experimental design, section VII shows 
the experimental and questionnaire results, and section VIII is a 
conclusion to the paper. 
II. EXAMPLE THAI MUSEUM SCENARIO 
The following scenario based on an existing Thailand 
Tourism Award winning [5] small local museum visited by the 
author is presented to show current problems which affect 
people with hearing impairments in their access to Thai culture 
and history in local museums. 
“Suchat Trapsin, who is the owner of the museum, 
allocated some parts of his house to become the Museum of 
Folk Art and Shadow Puppets in order to preserve the culture 
of shadow puppetry by teaching the public more about it. 
However, there is no information provided in text format inside 
the museum because normally Suchat will explain the history 
and tradition behind shadow puppetry by talking with visitors. 
When people with a hearing impairment watch the shadow 
puppet show, they cannot hear the conversation clearly 
because of the background music and the shadow puppet show 
is also fairly dark with Suchat operating the puppets from 
behind a screen, which makes lip-reading very difficult for 
them. Moreover, the language, which is used in the show, is 
quite complicated, and therefore sometimes difficult to 
understand if hearing impairment at birth affected their 
learning of language.” 
Other scenarios that were also investigated involving 
hearing impaired people included a tutorial, GP Surgery and 
Segway Tour in Rome. 
2015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT)
978-1-4799-7752-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
316

III. REVIEW OF RELATED FRAMEWORKS 
An extensive review of the literature found that there was 
no framework based on principles rather than just technology 
system architectures or solutions to guide developers in 
developing technology solutions for such face-to-face 
situations for people with hearing impairment, other disabilities 
or no disabilities that included one or more interaction types 
involving people, technology, and objects. The research 
challenges that were therefore identified were to develop a 
Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework (TEIF) and 
TEIF Method regarding disabled people interacting with 
people, technologies, and objects. As information and 
communication technology has become more important in 
society, many researchers have been concerned with how to 
use technology to support communication between people and 
improve interactions between people, technology, and people 
[6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11] or improve interactions between people, 
technology and objects [10]. The details of interaction 
frameworks are reviewed under the following two main 
category headings. 
A. Interaction Frameworks 
Sung et al. [10] proposed a framework for designing a 
mobile electronic guidebook for a history museum. An 
electronic guidebook was implemented and evaluated in 
comparison to a worksheet and visiting without any guidebook 
or worksheet. Users spent the most time with exhibits when 
using the electronic guidebook but there were no significant 
differences in the knowledge gained about exhibits. Their 
framework did not consider a scenario where an expert 
presented or explained the exhibits. Rukzio [9] presented a 
physical mobile interaction framework for using mobile 
devices as mediator for the interaction with a physical object 
and discussed its implementation. The interactions were 
Human-Computer, 
Human-Real 
World, 
Computer-Real 
World, and Computer-Computer. Dix’s framework for 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work [6] seems to address 
some of the possible interactions but it misses out some 
important interactions in the same time and at the same place 
situations such as people using technology to interact with real 
objects.  In Dix’s framework, the participants communicate 
with 
other 
participants 
in 
what 
is 
called 
‘direct 
communication’. Furthermore, the participants also interact 
with artefacts (man-made technology tools) by ‘controlling’ or 
‘acting’. Sometimes an artefact is shared between the 
participants; in this case, the artefact is not only the subject of 
communication but can become a medium of communication, 
called ‘feedthrough’, as shown in Figure 1. 
In communication about work and the artefacts of work, 
various means are used to refer to particular artefacts, and Dix 
terms this ‘deixis’. Dix [7] discussed the application of his 
CSCW Framework to mobile devices and Dix [8] used his 
framework to investigate issues determining the viability of 
the World Wide Web as an infrastructure for cooperative 
work. Vyas et al. [11] explored the role of artefacts supporting 
mediated communication. They used the term ‘artefacts’ to 
refer to analogue and digital objects that can serve as a tool in 
artefact - mediated communication. They asked students of a 
master’s course on Visual Design to come up with and use a 
communication metaphor in their concept design process. 
They noted the use of communication metaphors is culturally 
dependent.  Gaines [12] observed that recommendations based 
on practical experience of single users operating standard 
workstations had little to offer developers of complex systems 
integrating complex behaviour of people and computers. To 
address this issue he presents a conceptual framework for 
person-computer interaction in complex systems based on an 
analysis of systems theory literature to derive design 
principles for person-computer interaction and a hierarchical 
model of person-computer systems. His model acknowledges 
a technological system’s behaviour reflects the value systems 
and inter-personal attitudes of the system designer and so the 
same systems principles apply to the psychology, sociology, 
human-computer 
interaction, 
and 
computer-computer 
interaction. 
 
Fig. 1. Computer Supported Cooperative Work – A framework 
B. Considering Accessibility  
Cook and Hussey [14] modified Bailey’s Human 
Performance Model in order to accommodate assistive 
technology. The components of their model are: human 
(abilities/skills), activity (determined by role), context (setting, 
social, cultural, physical), and assistive technology (hardware, 
software, non-electronic). The Lázaro Galdiano Museum [15] 
provides a Guide app with accessibility options including 
subtitling and video in Spanish Sign Language for the hearing 
impaired and audio description for people with visual 
disabilities. Features include zoom, high contrast and screen 
reader.  
IV. TECHNOLOGY ENHANCED INTERACTION FRAMEWORK 
The TEIF that has been developed based on the main and 
sub-components identified in Table I and by adapting and 
extending the work of Dix [6] and Gaines [12] to help 
developers to design technology to support communication 
between people and improve interactions between people, 
technology and objects, particularly in complex situations 
involving disabled people. The TEIF aims to help developers 
design technology solutions to complex situations, particularly 
when disabled people are involved by helping developers 
think about the user requirements, designing interactions to 
meet these requirements and the criteria related to the 
requirements to evaluate the interactions. 
2015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT)
978-1-4799-7752-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
317

    
 
    TABLE I TECHNOLOGY EHNANCED INTERACTION FRAMEWORK 
 
 
Main Component 
Main and Sub-Component of Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework 
Sub-component 
Explanations and  Examples   
People 
Role 
A person has a role when communicating with others (e.g. presenter, audience, peer). Roles 
normally come in pairs such as speaker and audience (e.g. teacher and student or owner and 
visitor) and peer to peer (e.g. student and student or visitor and visitor). 
Ability / 
Disability 
People have abilities and disabilities which can affect their use of technology or 
understanding of language and which can lead to communication breakdown (e.g. physical, 
sensory, language, culture, communication, Information Technology (IT)). 
Objects 
Dimension 
Objects have 2 dimensions (2D) or 3 dimensions (3D), and a 3D object may have a 2D 
representation. 
Property 
Objects have colour, shape, size, and identity 
Content 
 
Objects have content which is human readable (text, pictures) and machine readable (QR 
code, AR tag, barcode, RFID tag, NFC). 
Technology 
Electronic  
Electronic technology has stored information, is online (e.g. internet, phone network) or 
offline (e.g. not connected to the internet or phone network), and is mobile (e.g. smartphone) 
or non-mobile (e.g. desktop computer). 
Non-electronic  
Non-electronic technology is used to store information in objects (e.g. writing with a pen on 
paper) and is mobile (e.g. pen) or non-mobile (e.g. full-size desktop typewriter).          
Usability and Accessibility 
People interact with technology through its user interface (e.g. touch screen, keyboard). 
Application      
or Service 
Electronic technology is an application (e.g. dictionary) or a service (e.g. weather forecast).  
Cost 
Technology has cost (e.g. of hardware, software, maintenance).   
Interactions and 
Communication 
People-People 
(P-P) 
 
People communicate verbally (speak, listen, ask, answer) and non-verbally (lip-read, smile, 
touch, sign, gesture, nod). When communicating, people may refer (speak or point) to 
particular objects or technology – this is known as ‘deixis’. 
People-Objects (P-O) 
People interact with objects for two main purposes: controlling (e.g. touch, hold or move), 
and retrieving information (e.g. look, listen, read, in order to get information or construct 
personal understanding and knowledge). 
People-Technology (P-T) 
People control technology (e.g. hold, move, use, type, scan, make image, press, swipe), 
transmit and store information (e.g. send, save, store, search, retrieve). 
People-Technology-People 
(P-T-P) 
People use technology to transmit information to assist communication with (e.g. send SMS, 
MMS, email, chat, instant message) other people. Technology is always designed for a 
purpose by people and so a robotic device triggered by the person walking past it is a P-T-P 
interaction. 
People-Technology 
-Objects(P-T-O) 
People use technology (e.g. point, move, hold, scan QR codes, scan AR tag, use camera, use 
compass) to transmit, store, and retrieve information (send, save, store, search, retrieve) to, in, 
and from objects.  
Time / Place 
Place 
Same and different time and place yield four categories:  same time (ST) and same place 
(SP), different time (DT)  and same place (SP), different time (DT) and different place (DP), 
same time (ST) but different place (DP). 
Time 
Context 
Location 
Location affects the use of technology (e.g. indoors, outdoors). For example GPS does not 
work well indoors. 
Weather  
Condition 
Weather condition may affect the use of technology (e.g. rainy, cloudy, sunny, windy, hot, 
cold, dry, wet). For example, the mobile phone screen doesn’t work well in sunshine.  
Signal Type  
and Quality 
Signal type can affect the quality of electronic technology (e.g. broadband, GPS, 3G, 4G). 
Background  
Noise 
Background noise can affect the communication particularly for hearing impaired people (e.g. 
background music, crowded situation). 
Lighting  
Light can affect the interaction (e.g. Inadequate light, too bright).  
Awareness of others’ 
interactions 
People can be aware of interactions involving other people 
Interaction Layer 
Culture 
Cultural layer includes countries, traditional, language and gesture (e.g. ‘hello’ is a normal 
greeting used in the culture). 
Intentionality  
Intention layer involves understanding, purpose and benefit (e.g. the intent is a greeting). 
Knowledge  
Knowledge layer involves facts, concepts, procedures, and principles (e.g. how to spell the 
word ‘hello’). 
Action  
Action layer involves actions and behaviours (e.g. pressing the correct key and not hitting 
neighbouring keys). 
Expression  
Expression layer describes how actions are carried out (e.g. whether action is correct, 
accurate, and prompt). 
Physical  
Physical layer is the lowest layer at which people interact with the physical world (e.g. the 
button is depressed and so sends the electronic code for the letter to the application). 
2015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT)
978-1-4799-7752-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
318

A. Terminology 
Terminology used in the TEIF is defined as follows: 
x 
Communication is the process of passing information 
from one person to another [14]. 
x 
Technology is a tool that helps people achieve their 
purpose. 
x 
People 
means 
anyone 
involved 
in 
direct 
communication or interaction with an object, 
technology, or other people. 
x 
Object is not virtual any anything that is not a 
technology or a person involved in communication or 
interaction. 
x 
Interactions can be between people and objects (P-O) 
or people and technology (P-T). People can also use 
technology to mediate interaction with people (P-T-P) 
or objects (P-T-O). 
x 
A complex situation is a situation, which has the 
interaction in the forms of P-P, P-T, P-T-P, and P-T-
O, especially when disabled people are involved. 
B. Main and Sub-components and Architecture of TEIF  
There are seven main components in the TEIF as shown in 
Table I. People can have roles, abilities, and disabilities. The 
components ‘Object’ and ‘Technology’ are used in order to 
extend Dix’s framework to show any type of interaction and 
the overall architecture of the TEIF is shown in Figure 2.  
Objects are defined as having three sub-components: 
dimensions, properties, and content. Technology has a cost 
and can be electronic or non-electronic, online or off-line, and  
mobile or non-mobile. Furthermore, it may or may not have 
stored content and may additionally have an interface and be 
an application or provide a service. The TEIF involves 
interactions from P-P, P-O, P-T, P-T-P, and P-T-O. ‘Time and 
Place’ can be divided into four categories [15]. Context can 
include factors and constraints such as location, signal quality, 
background noise, lighting, and weather conditions. The TEIF 
layers and explanations have been adapted from Gaines’ 
framework [12].  
 
Fig. 2. Architecture of the Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework 
V. TEIF METHOD 
 
The TEIF Method has been developed in order to help 
developers understand and apply the TEIF to help make 
communication and interaction more accessible for people 
with disabilities. The TEIF Method does not replace other 
methods but supports them by providing multiple-choice 
questions to help identify requirements, the answers to which 
help provide technology suggestions that support the design 
stage. The TEIF Interaction Diagram and Use Case Diagram 
are also provided to help with this stage. The example scenario 
of a hearing impaired visitor to the Shadow Puppet Museum is 
also provided in section II to help understanding of the TEIF 
Method.   
A. TEIF Method Overview 
This section describes the steps used in the TEIF Method. 
There are main five steps in the TEIF Method. Developers can 
go through steps 3 to 5 as many times as required to develop 
the best solution.  
Step 1: developers answer multiple-choice questions for 
gathering or evaluating requirements, which help identify any 
communication or interaction issues or problems involving 
hearing impaired people. 
Step 2: developers use the technology suggestions table, which 
is based on answers to the multiple-choice questions, to help 
in designing or evaluating technology solutions.  
Step 3: developers construct a technology solution scenario by 
using the technology suggestions table to help in designing or 
evaluating the solution. 
Step 4: developers draw the TEIF overview Interaction 
Diagram 
showing 
the 
interactions 
between 
‘People’, 
‘Technology’, and ‘Objects’ to help in designing the 
technology solution and evaluating how technologies can be 
best combined. 
Step 5: developers draw the TEIF overview Use Case Diagram 
to help in designing the technology solution, and evaluating 
how technologies can be best combined by showing the 
‘location’ of interaction activities and the actions of the people 
and object ‘actors’ that are required to carry out the related 
tasks with the technology. 
B. Example Multiple Choice Questions for Requirements 
The TEIF Method helps developers gather or evaluate 
requirements by using multiple-choice questions, which 
developed, based on the TEIF. The questions help identify 
issues for which a technology solution is required. Four 
example questions are shown below: 
12) What type of technology would be appropriate for the 
solution to the scenario? 
a. online technology (Internet) b. off-line technology  
c. I do not know 
13) What type of technology devices would be appropriate for 
the solution to the scenario?                                                     
a. mobile devices   b. non-mobile devices   c. I don't know 
16) Where does the situation take place? 
 
a. indoors  b. outdoors c. I do not know 
17) What are the two main environmental considerations 
identified that impact the scenario?                                          
a. noise (Background noise affects everyone’s ability to hear 
People
People
direct 
communication
Technology
Technology
Objects
Objects
control
 information retrieval
control, information 
transmission & storage
technology-mediated-
information retrieval
control, information transmission & storage
Information retrieval, technology-mediated-
communication
deixis
deixis
direct 
interaction
direct 
interaction
technology-mediated-
interaction
2015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT)
978-1-4799-7752-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
319

and understand what is said)                                                                      
b. room acoustics (surface (e.g. walls, windows, tile) and 
objects within every room interact to produce reverberation in 
response to sound.) 
c. distance (How far is the audience standing from the 
presenter?) 
d. visual access ( How well can the audience see everything 
that is happening in different locations?) 
e. lighting (Inadequate lighting or large banks of windows can 
be challenging for deaf or hard of hearing audience because 
they cannot see the speakers face well or an interpreter may be 
located in shadows)  
C. Example Technology Suggestions Table 
The example technology suggestions table is based on a 
review of available technologies that can assist hearing 
impaired people and can be used to help identify one or more 
technologies than can be used for the solution by ensuring any 
combination of technologies used for the solution addresses all 
the requirement issues (i.e. all the issues have at least one tick 
in their column). For example, Suchat would like to use online 
technology indoors which is reflected in the answers to 
questions 12 and 16. He also would like to use Chuty’s and 
her parents’ smartphones to keep his costs low, which is 
shown in the answers to questions 13, 18, and 19. Many 
technologies may meet a requirement: for example, all of the 
technology suggestions shown in Table II. The technology 
suggestions in the table are listed in order of total score. The 
online version uses tooltips to display the explanations for the 
ticks or crosses. 
 
TABLE II TECHNOLOGY SUGGESSION TABLE 
D.  Example Technology Solution Scenario for Thai Local 
Museum 
To help developers understand how to use the technology 
suggestions, an example solution is provided that incorporates 
some of the technology suggestions shown in Table II.  
 
‘The technology developer has decided based on the TEIF 
Method’s suggestions and discussions with their client Suchat 
to make available a mobile web site  with which Chuty and her 
parents can use their smart phones to enhance the visit. There 
is a specific function called live functionality which assists 
Chuty and her parents to communicate with Suchat. Chuty and 
her parents go to the mobile website  and enable the function 
before the tour starts. The function allows Suchat to notify 
Chuty and her parents when the tour begins and change the 
topics by pressing the ‘start’ button on his mobile phone. 
Chuty and her parents’ phones vibrate at the same time to 
notify them of this, and as Suchat starts speaking the pre-
prepared summary captions  for the first topic, appear on their 
smartphones. As the captions are presented on the mobile 
website, the words are highlighted in a sentence, allowing her 
to follow the conversation. Suchat can also notify Chuty and 
her parents that the topic is changing by sending a message  
to the server causing the captions to automatically change on 
the mobile website. Sometimes Chuty can’t catch all of the 
conversation but she can pick out keywords through lip 
reading and hearing. Moreover, she can search for text by 
using automatic speech recognition of keywords, and then 
visually or manually select captions based on possible 
keywords which are highlighted in colour. So she can scroll 
up and down to find the conversation. When Suchat shows the 
shadow puppet, he uses his mobile phone to select and 
indicate the captions of the show that he is currently 
performing. Chuty and her parents then can enjoy the show by 
watching the shadow puppet and they also can read the 
captions when they need to on their smartphones. During the 
tour, Chuty asks some questions by typing instant messages on 
her smartphone which Suchat answers supported by selecting 
pre-prepared caption answers to frequently asked questions or 
by typing the answers on his smartphone. When Chuty asks 
questions about the exhibits, to help Chuty understand 
Suchat’s answers she can use the further information 
displayed on her smartphone browser through the links from 
the QR codes on the exhibits.’ 
VI. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
Following a successful expert review and validation of 
the TEIF and TEIF Method by three developer experts, three 
accessibility experts and an HCI professor, an experiment was 
carried out involving 36 experienced developers evaluating 
requirements and technology solutions. Half the participants 
used the TEIF Method and the other half used whatever other 
methods they would normally have used and were then shown 
the TEIF Method. The experiment was carried out in a face-to-
face situation with the researcher so the researcher was in 
control by passing the appropriate document to the participant 
and ensuring the participant engaged with the two 
experimental tasks and questionnaire. There was no significant 
difference between the TEIF Method and the Other Method 
groups in terms of the number of years of practical experience 
designing software and experience in designing technology 
solutions for disabled people and so the groups were well 
balanced in this respect. The participants in both groups were 
asked to select the best ten requirements from 29 possible 
requirements for a technology solution to the disability related 
problems they identified from the scenario interview transcript 
and underline the keywords of each answer on the transcript 
sheet. The participants were asked to give ratings between 0 
 
 
Technology  
suggestions 
 
 
 
Which requirements the technology meets 
12a.online 
13a.mobile devices 
14a.pre-prepared  
speech 
16a. indoor 
17a. noise 
17e.inadequate 
18a. low cost 
19a. work with 
smart phones 
Total Score 
1. Mobile web site 
9 
9 
9 
9 9 9 9 9 
16 
2.Pre-prepared 
caption/subtitle 
9 
9 
9 
9 9 9 9 9 
16 
3. Frequently asked 
questions (FAQ) 
9 
9 
9 
9 9 9 9 9 
16 
5. Instant messaging 
9 
9 
9 
9 × 
9 9 9 
15 
13. Speech 
recognition 
× 
9 
9 
9 9 9 9 × 
13 
2015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT)
978-1-4799-7752-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
320

and 10 for how well each of the three solutions (A, B, C) 
provided met each of the ten requirements and were asked to 
underline the words on the solution sheets that helped them 
with their ratings. To assist them with this task they were 
provided with a modified version of the paper based 
technology suggestion table that was provided for the TEIF 
Method group that only contained descriptions of the 
technologies, without any ticks, crosses, or explanations. The 
participants were asked to give background information, rate 
the clarity of explanation of TEIF Method steps, evaluate 
whether and how the TEIF Method helped, imagine how the 
TEIF Method might help in the future, and any other 
comments about the usefulness or value of the TEIF Method.  
VII. EXPERIMENTAL AND QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS 
x 
The mean number of correct requirements was 
significantly higher (p<0.001) for participants using the 
TEIF Method (mean = 8.33) than the Other Methods 
(mean = 3.89). 
x 
The TEIF Method helped developers select a solution 
significantly (p=0.01) more often than the Other Methods 
that was not worse than a solution rated best by the 
experts. 
x 
The TEIF Method helped developers rate solutions 
significantly closer (p<0.05) to the experts’ ratings than 
the Other Methods for solution A but not for solutions B 
and C, and this applied similarly to each requirement. 
x 
The participants thought that the TEIF Method would 
also help with gathering requirements for technology 
solutions to interaction problems involving hearing 
impaired people, and for other disabled people. 
x 
The participants thought that the TEIF Method would 
help designing technology solutions to interaction 
problems involving hearing impaired people, and if 
information was provided for other disabled people. 
x 
Participants thought that the technology suggestions table 
in the TEIF Method helped with identifying technology 
solutions to interaction problems involving hearing 
impaired people. 
x 
The participants thought that the TEIF Method would 
help designing technology solutions to interaction 
problems involving hearing impaired people, and if 
information was provided for other disabled people. 
x 
Participants thought that the TEIF Method helped 
improve a developer’s awareness of interaction issues 
involving hearing impaired people. 
x 
Participants thought that the TEIF Method helped 
improve 
a 
developer’s 
understanding 
of 
how 
environment context affects interaction involving hearing 
impaired people. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The TEIF and TEIF Method have been shown to have the 
potential to guide developers in developing technology 
accessibility solutions for Thai museums from the results of an 
experiment and questionnaire involving 36 experienced 
developers evaluating requirements and technology solutions. 
The TEIF has been developed based on the main and sub-
components and the TEIF Method had been developed to help 
developers to design technology to support communication 
between people and improve interactions between people, 
technology and objects, particularly in complex situations 
involving disabled people. Future work includes extending the 
requirement questions and technology suggestions tables to 
address the needs of people with a wider range of disabilities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre. (2005). Local 
Museum Database  Retrieved 07/02/, 2012, from 
http://www.sac.or.th/databases/museumdatabase_eng/ 
[2] Proctor, N. (2005). Off Base or On Target? Pros and Cons of Wireless 
and Location-Aware Applications in the Museum Paper presented at the 
ICHIM 05 - Digital Culture & Heritage, Paris, France. 
http://www.archimuse.com/publishing/ichim05/Proctor.pdf 
[3] Mather, J., Gregory, S., & Archbold, S. (2011). The Experiences of Deaf 
Young People with Sequential Bilateral Cochlear Implants Deafness & 
Education International, 13(4), 152-172. 
[4] National Electronics and Computer Technology Center, & The National 
Telecommunications 
Commission. 
(2009). 
The 
provision 
of 
telecommunications services for the disabled and the elderly in 
Thailand. Bangkok, Thailand. 
[5] ThailandTourist. (2014). Suchart Subsin, the Puppet Master and his 
Museum  Retrieved 18/08/2014, 2014, from 
http://www.thailandtourist.net/guide/9_0_124_1_Puppet-Master-and-
Museum.html 
[6] Dix, A. (1994). Computer supported cooperative work - a framework. In 
Design Issues in CSCW Eds. D. Rosenburg and C. Hutchison. , Springer 
Verlag, 23-37.  
[7] Dix, A. (1995). Cooperation without (reliable) communication: 
Interfaces for mobile applications. Distributed Systems Engineering, 
2(3), 171.  
[8] Dix, A. (1997). Challenges for Cooperative Work on the Web: An 
Analytical Approach. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 
6(2-3), 135-156. doi: 10.1023/a:1008635907287 
[9] Rukzio, E. a. B., Gregor and Wetzstein, Sergej (2008). The Physical 
Mobile Interaction Framework (PMIF). Technical Report LMU-MI-
2008-2.  
[10] Sung, Y.-T., Chang, K.-E., Hou, H.-T., & Chen, P.-F. (2010). Designing 
an electronic guidebook for learning engagement in a museum of 
history. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(1), 74-83. doi: 
10.1016/j.chb.2009.08.004 
[11] Vyas, D., Dix, A., & Nijholt, A. (2008). Role of Artefacts in Mediated 
Communication. Paper presented at the CHI 2008, Florence, Italy.  
[12] Gaines, B. R. (1988). A conceptual framework for person-computer 
interaction in complex systems. Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE 
Transactions on, 18(4), 532-541. doi: 10.1109/21.17371 
[13] Cook, A., & Hussey, S. (1995). Assistive Technologies: Principles and 
Pratice. Mosby: St. Louis, MO. 
[14] Davis, K. (1977). Human Behavior At Work. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Co. 
[15] The Lázaro Galdiano Museum launches the first application of the 
Áppside project. Available: http://www.gvam.es/fr/lazaro-galdiano-
museum-launches-first-application-appside-
project/#sthash.5Nl5Iq9R.dpuf 
[16] Ellis, J. R., Ridolfi, & G. & Zwirner, F. (1991). Groupware: Some issues 
and experiences. Communications of the ACM, 34(1)
 
2015 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT)
978-1-4799-7752-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
321

