Rochester Institute of Technology 
Rochester Institute of Technology 
RIT Digital Institutional Repository 
RIT Digital Institutional Repository 
Theses 
4-2019 
Utilizing Mobile Technology to Improve Accessibility for Museum 
Utilizing Mobile Technology to Improve Accessibility for Museum 
Visitors with Autism 
Visitors with Autism 
Felicia Dianne Swartzenberg 
fds9410@rit.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.rit.edu/theses 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Swartzenberg, Felicia Dianne, "Utilizing Mobile Technology to Improve Accessibility for Museum Visitors 
with Autism" (2019). Thesis. Rochester Institute of Technology. Accessed from 
This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the RIT Libraries. For more information, please contact 
repository@rit.edu. 

 
 
 
THE ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS 
 
 
UTILIZING MOBILE TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE ACCESSIBILITY 
FOR MUSEUM VISITORS WITH AUTISM 
 
 
A THESIS SUBMITTED 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE 
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE DEGREE 
IN MUSEUM STUDIES 
DEPARTMENTS OF PERFORMING ARTS AND VISUAL CULTURE AND HISTORY 
 
 
BY 
FELICIA DIANNE SWARTZENBERG 
 
 
 
 
 
APRIL 2019

 
i 
 
 
The members of the Committee approve the thesis of Felicia Swartzenberg submitted on 
April 25, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Juilee Decker 
______________________ 
Juilee Decker, Ph.D. 
Primary Advisor 
 
Tamar Carroll 
______________________ 
Tamar Carroll, Ph.D. 
Secondary Advisor 
 
Tina Lent 
_____________________ 
Tina Lent, Ph.D. 
MUSE Program Director  
MUSE Program Director 
 
 

 
ii 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I extend special thanks to all of the people who assisted me in creating this app and 
completing my thesis. First and most of all, I am so appreciative of my partner and app 
developer, Peter Laurin, who brought my ideas to life. Without his help, I would never have been 
able to complete this project. 
I would also like to thank those who participated in my user testing: Dr. Juliee Decker’s 
Visitor Engagement class for taking time out of the curriculum to test my app; and the families 
who participated in my user testing on-site at the Strong National Museum of Play, Roberta and 
her son, Austin, and Lindsay and her son, Preston. Their support and feedback on this project 
was incredibly helpful, and their willingness to be involved and contribute was vital to the 
success of my thesis. 
Lastly, I would like to thank everyone who supported me as I developed this thesis, 
including: both my advisers, Dr. Juilee Decker and Dr. Tamar Carroll; the College of Liberal 
Arts Student Research fund, which helped fund the development of my app, SenseEase: Strong 
Museum; and my mom, Jennifer, whose constant love, support, and belief in my skills helped 
motivate me whenever I felt stressed or discouraged.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iii 
 
Abstract 
What if museums could provide an app that makes interaction easier for visitors with 
autism and allows them to enjoy the museum any day of the week like their neurotypical 
counterparts? This research discusses how museums can utilize downloadable apps for personal 
devices to provide easily accessible resources for children on the autism spectrum and their 
families to use so they can have a more inclusive and sensory-friendly museum experience.  To 
determine the feasibility of this, I worked in collaboration with an app developer, Peter Laurin, to 
create a prototype-app called SenseEase: Strong Museum for the Reading Adventure Land 
exhibit area at the Strong National Museum of Play in Rochester. The app caters to children 
ranging from four to twelve years of age, and aims to help prepare them and their families for 
their museum visit and help them cope with the overwhelming sensory stimulation that occurs in 
this particular museum environment. To evaluate the effectiveness of the app, I conducted two 
rounds of user testing, one with a general audience and one with my target audience for the app, 
and found that SenseEase: Strong Museum was a well-received and effective aid for children on 
the autism spectrum and their families navigating the unfamiliar and overstimulating 
environment at the museum. 
 
 
 

 
iv 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Acknowledgements ..………………………………………………………………..……………ii        
Abstract ..………………………………………………………………………………………...iii        
Introduction ...……………………………………………………………………………………..1 
Literature Review ..……………………………………………………………………………….3 
Research Methodology ...………………………………………………………………………..20 
App Development Methodology ...………………………………………..……………………..21 
User Testing Procedure ...………………………………………………………………………..32 
User Testing Findings .…………………………………………………………………………..34 
Future Development and Adoption ..…………………………………………………………....38 
Conclusion ……………..………………………………………………………………………..39 
Appendix ……………..………………………………………………………………………….43 
Bibliography ……………..……………………………………………………………………...64

 
1 
 
Introduction 
In an ideal world, museums function as public institutions that welcome visitors of all 
ages, backgrounds, and abilities. However, until the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
passed in 1990, most public spaces, including museums, did not cater to all audiences; they only 
served people perceived as being of able mind and body. As a result of the ADA and the efforts 
of disability rights activists, now, most public spaces, facilities, and institutions in the United 
States are more conscious of including people of all physical and mental abilities.  
Many museums have made efforts to improve their accessibility options, including 
creating programming for people on the autism spectrum that is aimed at creating a more 
sensory-friendly experience. However, no museum is perfect and there are opportunities for 
improvement in every museum’s accessible programming options. The options available for an 
organization the size of the Smithsonian Institution are far greater than museums of smaller 
magnitude. However, low budgets do not eliminate the need for accessible options, they simply 
pose challenges: how can one create an accessible experience without spending money on early 
museum openings, sensory-friendly gear like noise cancelling headphones, or hiring someone to 
train staff on how to work with individuals on the spectrum? 
One method of approaching this question could be to provide an app that makes museum 
interactions easier for visitors with autism and enables them to enjoy the museum any day of the 
week like their neurotypical counterparts. This research discusses how museums can utilize 
downloadable apps for personal devices to provide easily accessible resources for children on the 
autism spectrum and their families to use so they can have a more inclusive and sensory-friendly 
museum experience.  To determine the feasibility of this, I collaborated with an app developer, 
Peter Laurin, a senior game design and development student at Rochester Institute of 
Technology, to create a prototype-app called SenseEase: Strong Museum for the Reading 

 
2 
 
Adventure Land area at the Strong National Museum of Play in Rochester, N.Y. The overall goal 
of the app is to assist the museum in providing a comfortable, positive museum experience for 
visitors on the autism spectrum by giving visitors a hand-held tool to help them prepare for their 
visit and distract from the overwhelming sensory stimulation that occurs on site in this particular 
museum environment. My focus is particularly on visitors ranging from four to twelve years of 
age, as that is the general age range of visitors that the Strong Museum attracts. Once the app 
was completed, I conducted two rounds of user testing, one with a general audience and one with 
the target audience of children on the autism spectrum and their families, to collect feedback on 
the effectiveness of the app. After reviewing the feedback, I observed that users found that this 
app and its contents were a highly effective tool that helped them successfully navigate and have 
a positive experience at the museum.  
 
 

 
3 
 
Literature Review 
Americans with Disabilities Act 
When establishing the ADA, Congress recognized that “physical and mental disabilities 
in no way diminish a person's right to fully participate in all aspects of society, but that people 
with physical or mental disabilities are frequently precluded from doing so because of prejudice, 
antiquated attitudes, or the failure to remove societal and institutional barriers.”1 The act was 
drafted and passed to accomplish the following: 
(1) To provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of 
discrimination against individuals with disabilities; 
(2) To provide clear, strong, consistent, enforceable standards addressing discrimination 
against individuals with disabilities; 
(3) to ensure that the Federal Government plays a central role in enforcing the standards 
established in this chapter on behalf of individuals with disabilities; and 
(4) To invoke the sweep of congressional authority, including the power to enforce the 
fourteenth amendment and to regulate commerce, in order to address the major areas of 
discrimination faced day-to-day by people with disabilities.2 
 
Since the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, there have been several 
revisions and additions to the document. One revision of particular importance for museums 
came on September 15, 2010, when the Department of Justice revised the regulations for Titles II 
and III of the ADA and adopted enforceable accessibility standards.3 This revision was titled 
“ADA Standards for Accessible Design.” These standards set minimum requirements for newly 
designed, constructed, or altered public and commercial facilities with the intention of making 
public spaces easily accessible for individuals of all abilities.4 For museums, this meant that they 
                                                           
1 ADA: Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, Public Law 101-336. § III. 108th Congress, 2nd session (July 26, 
1990), https://www.ada.gov/pubs/adastatute08.htm#12101b. 
2 ADA: Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 
3 ADA: Standards for Accessible Design, Department of Justice (September 15, 2010), 
https://www.ada.gov/2010ADAstandards_index.htm. 
4 ADA: Standards for Accessible Design. 

 
4 
 
needed to reevaluate not only their building floor plan, but their exhibition designs as well. 
While many of these changes can be costly in terms of renovation, the result of allowing all 
visitors to enjoy a space regardless of ability is a more than worthy outcome.  
While the ADA and related legislature have been very helpful in terms of making change 
in public spaces for people with disabilities, relying on law alone to mandate these changes is 
insufficient. Minimal compliance with the law can mean that institutions will miss out on the 
opportunity to create an accessible and inclusive space that would enhance the visitor experience 
for all types of audiences. Taking action simply because the law dictates what should be done 
can result in thoughtless accommodation when institutions should be actively devising unique 
and comfortable ways to include people of different abilities. 
In her undergraduate thesis Accessibility Practices & the Inclusive Museum: Legal 
Compliance, Professional Standards, and the Social Responsibility of Museums, museum studies 
professional Ruth Starr explains that often much of the motivation museums have for 
institutional change is complaint-driven.5 This means institutions assume compliance with ADA 
laws and accessible design until a complaint is issued by a visitor.6 Most, if not all, public spaces 
comply with the legal obligation to be accessible, but often—regardless of intent—it seems that 
these actions toward accessibility rarely exceed the bare minimum. 
As articulated by Starr, assumed compliance has seemingly resulted from limited and 
vague goals that public and cultural institutions are expected to meet in order to become more 
accessible and provide reasonable accommodations.7 Vague, undefined goals can become 
                                                           
5 Ruth Erin Starr, “Accessibility Practices & The Inclusive Museum: Legal Compliance, Professional Standards, and 
the Social Responsibility of Museums” (Bachelor’s thesis, Rochester Institute of Technology, 2016).  
6 Starr, “Accessibility Practices & The Inclusive Museum: Legal Compliance, Professional Standards, and the Social 
Responsibility of Museums.” 
7 Starr, “Accessibility Practices & The Inclusive Museum: Legal Compliance, Professional Standards, and the Social 
Responsibility of Museums.” 

 
5 
 
problematic due to the varied interpretations of what “reasonable accommodation” means for 
individual institutions. A large, well-funded institution may have a different definition of what is 
reasonable than a smaller, volunteer-run institution. Similarly, museums in some communities 
may have higher standards for what qualifies as reasonable accommodation than other 
communities.  
To attempt to address or overcome differing interpretations of what constitutes as 
“reasonable” access and accommodation, the American Alliance of Museums (AAM), the 
national accrediting body for museums in the United States, has adopted their own 
Characteristics of Excellence, a document detailing the core standards for all accredited 
museums.8 This document includes several key points that further clarify what museums should 
be thinking about when developing reasonable accommodations and access for the museum: the 
museum must identify the different demographics and communities it serves and use that 
knowledge to guide decisions on how the institution serves the public; the museum must 
understand “the characteristics and needs of its existing and potential audiences” and utilize this 
knowledge as it creates exhibitions and interpretations; the museum must show “a commitment 
to providing the public with physical and intellectual access” to museum resources; and the 
museum must utilize methods that are appropriate for its audience, educational goals, and 
resources.9 Putting emphasis on the needs and desires of the visitor can help museums evaluate 
what reasonable accommodations are, forcing the museum to think past assumed compliance and 
observe their audience. Asking the question “What does my community need?” can provide 
                                                           
8 American Association of Museums, “Characteristics of Excellence,” (1993), http://ww2.aam-
us.org/resources/ethics-standards-and-best-practices/characteristics-of-excellence; Since this document has been 
published, the American Association of Museums has rebranded and now goes by the title “American Alliance of 
Museums. 
9 American Association of Museums, “Characteristics of Excellence, (1993). 

 
6 
 
much more insightful answers than asking “What do I need to do in order to comply with the 
ADA?”  
In the years since the passage of the ADA, museums have worked diligently to ensure 
that their facilities and exhibition spaces are able to be seen and appreciated by everyone 
regardless of their physical limitations. One example of this is the development and adoption of 
universal design. Universal design focuses on “the physical, cognitive, and social inclusion of 
visitors with disabilities in museum experiences,” and, to achieve this inclusion, the Center for 
Universal Design published formal principles of universal design and principles for universal 
learning.10 These principles of universal design and learning are not only helpful for those with 
disabilities, they can be helpful for anyone. For example, ramps are essential for people who use 
wheelchairs or other assistive walking devices, but they can also be really helpful for families 
who have a baby stroller or older people who may feel more comfortable or have an easier time 
using a ramp than walking up stairs. The Boston Museum of Science has employed the universal 
design approach since the 1980s and continues to ensure that each exhibit and space within the 
museum is “designed with inclusion in mind.”11 In addition to being transparent with their 
reports and planning for inclusive design,12 the museum also provides visitors with a detailed list 
of their accessible services, including transportation, interpreters, and specific tips for visitors 
with autism or similar developmental delays.13  
                                                           
10 “Universal Design for Museum Learning Experiences: Resources for museum professionals on employing a 
universal design approach for exhibits, programs, and evaluation,” Boston Museum of Science, accessed Nov. 30, 
2018, https://www.mos.org/UniversalDesign.  
11 “Universal Design for Museum Learning Experiences: Resources for museum professionals on employing a 
universal design approach for exhibits, programs, and evaluation.” 
12 See the Universal Design Plan for Exhibit Design & Development provided by the Boston Museum of Science, 
https://www.mos.org/sites/dev-elvis.mos.org/files/docs/misc/MOS_UD_Plan.pdf.  
13 “Accessibility,” Boston Museum of Science, accessed Nov. 30, 2018, https://www.mos.org/accessibility.  

 
7 
 
Abiding by outlines set forth by the ADA, universal design and individual museum 
programs are a great start toward ensuring all visitors can enjoy a museum experience. However, 
there is still room for improvement, particularly in serving individuals with mental disabilities or 
developmental delays, like autism spectrum disorder. While these visitors may not need what 
one might consider traditional accommodation, like needing a certain size text or an elevator or 
ramp to travel floor to floor, they still have needs that museums must meet for them to truly 
enjoy their museum visit. 
 
Living with autism 
For many individuals on the autism spectrum, simple stimuli encountered in everyday life 
can result in catastrophic and overwhelming feelings that are both physically and mentally 
exhausting. In his book, Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism: A Toolbox 
for Helping Children with Autism Feel Safe, Accepted, and Competent, behavior and autism 
specialist Bill Nason explains that people who are on the autism spectrum have difficulty with 
registering, integrating, and processing sensory experiences in all areas of life.14 These issues can 
materialize in many ways, the most common being: fragmented or distorted perception; hyper or 
hyposensitivity to sensory stimulation; sensory defensiveness,; difficulty integrating one’s 
senses; mono processing; delayed processing; sensory overload; and modulating arousal level.15 
All of these issues make it difficult for an individual with autism to interact with the world and 
other people, particularly in environments that have a plethora of sensory stimulation, such as 
loud noises, flashing lights, or large crowds.  
                                                           
14 Bill Nason, “Part III: Sensory Issues in Autism,” in Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism: A 
Toolbox for Helping Children with Autism Feel Safe, Accepted, and Competent (London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 
2014), 129-196. 
15 Nason, Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism, 129-130. 

 
8 
 
For someone with distorted perception, the brain cannot integrate the many details of a 
social situation, leaving the individual confused by a never ending stream of overwhelming 
stimuli.16 For an individual with sensory defensiveness, the increased sensitivity to certain 
stimuli can cause discomfort or pain, and they often try to escape a situation that is 
overwhelming them.17 When one is bombarded with too much stimulation that is too intense to 
process, one might suffer from sensory overload, which causes extreme emotional distress. 
Sensory overload is what most parents, caregivers, and other guardians try to avoid. For people 
who are neurotypical, their brain can filter out external stimuli, such as background noise, so the 
individual can focus on the task at hand. This filter does not function effectively for those who 
are on the autism spectrum, causing their brain to be bombarded by too much stimulation.18 This 
bombardment prompts the brain to go into survival mode, meaning it prioritizes protecting itself 
from overwhelming stimuli over anything else. When a person on the autism spectrum reaches 
this level of stimulation, they can shut down and become unresponsive so their brain can escape 
the overload, or they can have a emotional outburst or act out to escape the triggering stimuli.19 
Although communicating with others is often difficult for people on the spectrum, there 
are some who have stepped forward to describe how their unique sensory perception affects their 
lives and interactions. Many people—including Temple Grandin, Donna Williams, Sean Barron 
and others—have provided written books and articles describing their life experiences. In these 
biographical accounts, common themes of their childhood are “fear, confusion, pain and the 
arduousness of life” due to a lack of understanding of the world around them.20 Most 
                                                           
16 Nason, Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism, 130. 
17 Nason, Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism, 132. 
18 Nason, Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism, 139. 
19 Nason, Autism Discussion Page on the Core Challenges of Autism, 139. 
20 Shirley Cohen, Targeting Autism: What We Know, Don't Know, and Can Do to Help Young Children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorders (Berkeley: University of California, 2007): 24-40. 

 
9 
 
neurotypical children would find a way to tell an adult when their emotions start to get out of 
control, but one particular theme that has been echoed by many individuals on the spectrum is a 
difficulty interacting with others; this means that communicating their feelings to avoid spiraling 
into overwhelming anxiety or fear may not be possible. Furthermore, humans, while guided by 
societal rules, are fairly unpredictable. One day someone can be friendly to you, another they 
could be standoffish. For someone on the spectrum, this unpredictable behavior is often upsetting 
and can induce anxiety.21 Combining the unpredictability of humans with the individual’s 
difficulty communicating makes dealing with hyper or hypo-sensitivity to stimuli even more 
arduous and can leave one feeling overwhelmed and isolated. 
People alone can be overwhelming, but when you add them into a situation which has 
unfamiliar environmental stimuli or requires social interaction and communication, the 
individual’s state of mind can become significantly worse. Not only can all of this stimulation 
cause intense emotional distress, but being aware of having these sensitivities can be incredibly 
alienating. Donna Williams, an Australian writer and artist who was diagnosed with autism as a 
child, described her experience as nothing short of difficult: 
I had just come from another classroom where I had been tortured by sharp white 
fluorescent light, which made reflections bounce off everything. It made the room race 
busily in a constant state of change. Light and shadow dancing on people’s faces as they 
spoke turned the scene into an animated cartoon. Now, in this noisy classroom, I felt I 
was standing at the meeting point of several long tunnels. Blah-blah-blah echoed, 
bouncing noise wall to wall. I looked at the cheerful, placid faces of others; clearly I was 
the freak.22 
 
In a world full of sensory information, it can be difficult navigating social situations like 
going to the grocery story, sitting in a classroom, or visiting a museum. There is no simple 
                                                           
21 Cohen, Targeting Autism, 27-28. 
22 Cohen, Targeting Autism, 32. 

 
10 
 
escape from these stimuli in public, and often escape may not be a viable choice in the case of 
school or other social outings. So, many people with autism spectrum disorder have to learn how 
to cope with these overwhelming feelings. Due to the wide spectrum and varied ways autism 
affects individuals, there may never be one type of therapy or tool that works for everyone. So, in 
order to accommodate everyone, museums and other public institutions should look to multiple 
methods and tools of inclusion when designing an exhibition or providing accessible resources. 
 
Improving accessibility for individuals with autism in the space of a museum 
 
Museums are educational institutions meant to serve the public and their community. As 
with all educational institutions, it is important to ensure that each potential student is being 
served to the best of the institution’s abilities. For some audiences, this could mean making sure 
no jargon or uncommon terms are used in text and display panels within an exhibit. For others, 
this means utilizing different accessible methods of learning, such as providing braille on text 
panels, providing captioning for any video or audio playing within an exhibit, or making sure 
that the spaces provided are physically accessible to visitors who may use a wheelchair or other 
assistive devices. For individuals with autism, it means making efforts to ensure that the visitor 
can have the most comfortable and sensory-friendly visit possible. 
 
Museums across the country have been implementing specific programs aimed at 
creating a safe and enjoyable environment for individuals on the autism spectrum. One of the 
most common methods of inclusion is the early entry approach, which was implemented in 2011 
by the Smithsonian Institutions in the form of “Morning at the Museum.” This program allows 
early access to the museum for individuals on the autism spectrum and, during this time, the 

 
11 
 
museum provides sensory-friendly activities for all ages.23 One of the first museums to develop 
accessible programming specifically for individuals with autism and other similar developmental 
delays, the Smithsonian collaborated with families and experts to see how they can better 
accommodate visitors on the autism spectrum in their museums.24 In addition to the special 
activities, the museum also dims the lights and dampens sounds within exhibits in an effort to 
ensure that these elements will not trigger an overwhelming emotional response.25  
Another museum that has implemented excellent inclusive programming for individuals 
with autism is the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, Maryland, which has offered early entrance 
“Sensory Mornings” for people with developmental delays since 2010.26 The museum provides 
early entry, first-person social narratives—documents that describe expected behavior and 
interaction at a museum or given place—to help prepare individuals for their museum visit, and 
opportunities for visitors to craft, do yoga, or take a break in dimly lit areas.27 By collecting 
feedback and data at the end of each of their “Sensory Morning” events, the museum is able to 
continually improve their offerings.28 From this data, they found that 48% of the participants 
were first time visitors. This proves that the inclusive event allowed visitors to attend the 
museum who may not have felt comfortable or welcomed during normal museum hours.29 One 
visitor told the museum, “I cannot tell you what an event like this means to a family with a 
special needs child. It was so nice to be someplace where people understood that [our child] has 
                                                           
23 Aditi Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly For Those With Autism,” Smithsonian, 
January 5, 2018, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/how-museums-are-becoming-more-sensory-
friendly-for-those-with-autism-180967740/. 
24 Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly,” 2018. 
25 Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly,” 2018. 
26 Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly,” 2018.  
27 Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly,” 2018. 
28 Ashley Hosler, “Museum Access for All: Engaging Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders,” in Engagement and 
Access: Innovative Approaches for Museums, ed. Juilee Decker (London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015), 27-34. 
29 Hosler, Engagement and Access, 31. 

 
12 
 
different needs and different reactions to things. It was great to have so many ways to engage 
him.”30 It is evident from the positive response the Walters Art Museum received about their 
“Sensory Morning” program that the museum, and museums elsewhere, are missing out on an 
otherwise untapped audience. By simply providing one event or accessible services, museums 
can expand their audience to include visitors on the autism spectrum and ensure that the 
institution is serving the community in its entirety.  
The Intrepid Sea, Air, & Space Museum in New York City also offers a good deal of 
programming and materials to ensure people on the autism spectrum, or with similar 
developmental delays, can enjoy their museum experience. In addition to providing early entry 
days, they also provide a number of informational materials for families and individuals to utilize 
before their visit, such as a social narrative, sensory guide, visual vocabularies, videos, and 
virtual tours of the museum.31 Staff at the Intrepid also have tangle toys and noise cancelling 
headphones available for individuals who need them so they can distract or distance themselves 
from the overwhelming stimulation.32 Charlotte Martin, Senior Manager of Access Initiatives at 
Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum, is part of an access team at the museum that works to ensure 
it is “physically, emotionally, and intellectually accessible to all audiences.33 Martin and her 
team have created varied types of programming for individuals with autism, and other 
disabilities, and they continue to improve their offerings based on community and visitor 
feedback. For Martin, making sure that visitors of all abilities are welcome at the Intrepid is of 
                                                           
30 Hosler, Engagement and Access, 32. 
31 “Online resources: Plan your visit," Accessibility Resources, Intrepid Museum, last modified 2018,  
https://www.intrepidmuseum.org/education/accessibility-resources.  
32 Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly,” 2018. 
33 Charlotte Martin, “Museums in Motion Today,” in Museums in Motion: An Introduction to the History and 
Functions of Museums, ed. Edward P. Alexander, Mary Alexander, and Juilee Decker (London: Rowman & 
Littlefield, 2017), 306-307. 

 
13 
 
top priority, embodying the spirit of the Characteristics of Excellence set forth by the American 
Alliance of Museums: 
My approach is to be ready for anything and anyone. When I head out to greet groups, I 
am armed with bags loaded with touch objects, images, and supports for movement 
activities. I never want the reason a visitor didn’t “get” something to be because I didn’t 
provide an opportunity to communicate in the way that works for this individual. My 
lesson plans tend to be stuffed with caveats about adjustments that educators can make as 
they learn more about the participants.34 
 
In addition to early entry, a common and useful tool that museums provide are social 
narratives and sensory guides. As briefly mentioned above, these tools can be useful for families 
and individuals as they are planning their visit. A social narrative provides general expectations 
and behavior required for a museum visit, and parents of children with autism can utilize this 
information to plan their visit and practice expected behavior at the museum35 When combined 
with a sensory guide, which shows what types of sensory stimuli may be present in different 
areas of the museum, families can plan the best route for their child so as to avoid sensory 
overload to the best of their ability.36 
The reason many of these programs are so successful is that most museums craft them 
with the help and input from members of the autism community—from advocacy organizations 
to traditional visitor feedback from individuals or families of individuals on the autism 
spectrum.37 Drawing directly from the Characteristics of Excellence established by the American 
Alliance of Museums, the museums are working to gain an understanding of what this specific 
                                                           
34 Martin, Museums in Motion, 307. 
35 Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum, “Social Narrative," Intrepid Museum Accessibility Resources, last modified 
2018,  https://www.intrepidmuseum.org/education/accessibility-resources. 
36 Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum, “Sensory guide," Accessibility Resources, Intrepid Museum, last modified 
2018,  https://www.intrepidmuseum.org/education/accessibility-resources. 
37 Aditi Shrikant, “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly For Those With Autism,” Smithsonian, 
January 5, 2018, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/how-museums-are-becoming-more-sensory-
friendly-for-those-with-autism-180967740/. 

 
14 
 
community needs and then utilize their feedback to ensure that they are providing both an 
enjoyable and educational experience for each visitor.   
While these early entry days and pre-visit materials are highly useful, they are not the 
single perfect answer for inclusivity. For early entry, the flaw is obvious: one can only attend the 
museum on certain days if sensory-friendly accommodations are necessary for one’s enjoyment 
and comfort. The sensory-friendly days are beneficial, as they increase the sense of community 
among parents, families, and individuals with autism, but this does ultimately separate the autism 
cohort from the mainstream community. Fostering a community of people who share similar 
challenges and experiences is highly important, so rather than rendering this method of inclusion 
completely obsolete, museum professionals and researchers should look to how they can 
improve and expand the programs they already provide. Sensory guides and social narratives are 
a great starting point, as they can help individuals navigate around potentially triggering stimuli 
during a traditional museum visit. However, a pre-written guide may not be helpful in the 
moment when stimuli start to become overwhelming and sensory overload is on the horizon, 
particularly when it comes to stimuli coming from other visitors rather than the museum itself. If 
individuals had a pocket-sized tool that enabled them to navigate the stimuli in a museum and 
offered activities that could help an individual cope with these overwhelming feelings, the two 
aforementioned hurdles could, in theory, be surpassed with relative ease.  
 
Using technology to mediate education in the space of a museum 
 
Scholarly studies in the field of psychology and education point to the utility of 
technology as an educational tool for individuals on the autism spectrum. Given the limitations 
many people on the spectrum have with face-to-face interaction and communication, technology 

 
15 
 
can be used as a mediator to assist in various educational situations. From learning about daily 
tasks, like the importance of brushing one’s teeth, to classroom learning, using technology as a 
means to facilitate education can help overcome some of the issues children with autism may 
face in a traditional classroom or educational environment. Finding different methods of 
mediating education in an environment that involves direct communication between the 
instructor and the instructed can greatly enhance the quality of learning for individuals on the 
autism spectrum.  
 
One study, published in 2014, looked at interactive technologies that were beneficial for 
people with autism and explained that computers can help support the sensory filtering process 
by only displaying relevant information on the screen.38 The study also observed that computers 
can be more predictable when it comes to interaction; they can offer a chance to be uninhibitedly 
repetitious, offer opportunities to create a routine, and are consistent in how they function. All of 
these features can help create a more comfortable experience for people on the spectrum who 
often feel anxious around unpredictable elements and seek security.39  
Another study from 2016, conducted by faculty in the department of informatics in 
special education at the Federal University of Rio Grande, took this research further and found 
that while computer mediated education was very helpful, the use of touch and mobile devices 
were significantly more user-friendly than the traditional laptop.40 According to the study: 
The interaction with the tablet showed a more friendly and intuitive use, since it is used 
more naturally, using fingers to touch the screen. The tablet can be used anywhere and in 
any position, which is good for students who are hyperactive.41  
                                                           
38 Julie A. Kientz et all, Interactive Technologies for Autism ed. Ronald M. Baecker (Morgan Claypool Publishers, 
2014), 1-56.  
39 Kientz et all, Interactive Technologies for Autism, 8. 
40 Lucila Maria Costi Santarosa and Debora Conforto, “Educational and Digital Inclusion for Subjects with Autism 
Spectrum Disorders in 1:1 Technological Configuration,” Computers in Human Behavior 60, (2016): 293-300. 
41 Santarosa and Conforto, Computers in Human Behavior, 293. 

 
16 
 
 
With a laptop, one uses their fingers to control a mouse, which controls a small cursor on 
the screen. For someone with difficulty integrating different sensory perceptions—specifically, 
integrating sight and touch to understand the relationship between the mouse and the cursor—
using a mouse may be frustrating or may not even make logical sense to the user.42 With touch 
screens, one uses their finger to control what happens on a device, making the connection 
between one’s action and the outcome of what is produced on screen more concrete.  
Diving deeper into the topic, one study published in the Journal of Medical Systems 
researched what exact methods of touch interaction seemed to produce the most positive and 
user-friendly experience for individuals with autism. This study looked at Human-Computer 
Interaction models and determined that the most favored forms of interaction for individuals on 
the autism spectrum were keystroke interaction, tapping interaction, and touch interaction.43 
They tested three apps requiring different types of interaction and observed twenty-one 
individuals on the autism spectrum utilizing the apps to gather data.44 In addition to identifying 
the best and most preferred types of interaction, they were able to collect information regarding 
ideal app design, specifically icon size and shape. They found that size of the icons within the 
app interfered with their study results and went further to identify the ideal shape and size of 
icons for individuals with autism: a square that is 144 X 144 px.45 Studying and referencing all of 
this information can be helpful when designing and creating apps for individuals on the autism 
                                                           
42 Santarosa and Conforto, Computers in Human Behavior, 293. 
43 Quezada et al., “Usability Operations on Touch Mobile Devices for Users with Autism,” Journal of Medical 
Systems, 41 no. 184 (2017): 1-11. 
44 Quezada et al., Journal of Medical Systems. 
45 Quezada et al., Journal of Medical Systems; The measurement (px) stands for pixels, a common form of 
measurement when using digital design tools. 

 
17 
 
spectrum. It is also important to understand that features in common apps such as sudden 
flashing lights or sound effects can affect individuals on the autism spectrum in a negative way.  
One app that has been successful in accommodating the needs of individuals on the 
autism spectrum is MagnusCards, an app inspired by creator Nadia Hamilton’s brother, Troy. 
Troy has autism and Nadia has dedicated much of her life to helping individuals with special 
needs, which includes creating this app.46 MagnusCards features digital card decks which contain 
social narratives that help guide the users through daily activities, including brushing their teeth 
and going to the grocery store.47 For $60 per year, users gain unlimited access to the app and are 
able to create new cards within the app, allowing them to tailor the experience to a specific 
individual.48 As of 2015, there were more than 650 users, and that number has surely grown in 
the years since.49 The app is useful for people of all ages and abilities, providing twelve 
categories of card decks with options to customize them.50 Most of these categories deal with 
real-world problems, such as cleaning, entertainment, money management, and personal care.51 
The idea of having a pocket handbook for social interaction and everyday activities can 
be incredibly useful when applied to a museum setting. In a study published in the Journal of 
Museum Education, Damian Maher observed how students interacted with an iPad being used 
for a classroom assignment within the space of a museum. The students, teacher, and Maher all 
                                                           
46“MagnusCards: An Autism Life Skills & Transition Support Tool,” Magnus Cards, accessed Oct. 14, 2018, 
https://magnusmode.com/magnuscards-an-autism-life-skills-transition-support-tool/#about-section.  
47 “MagnusCards” 
48 Terry Pender, “Startup’s digital cards helps people with special needs navigate daily life,” The Record, Feb. 21, 
2015, https://www.therecord.com/news-story/5440793-startup-s-digital-cards-helps-people-with-special-needs-
navigate-daily-life/.  
49 Pender, The Record, 2015. 
50 “MagnusCards: An Autism Life Skills & Transition Support Tool,” Magnus Cards, accessed Oct. 14, 2018, 
https://magnusmode.com/magnuscards-an-autism-life-skills-transition-support-tool/#about-section.  
51 “MagnusCards” 

 
18 
 
found that the iPad supported and enhanced learning within a museum.52 Maher also found that, 
despite the consensus that the iPad enhanced learning, the presence of apps and games on the 
iPad distracted students while at the museum.53 While games will likely always be a source of 
distraction, this is no reason to ban or exclude iPads and personal devices from museum 
education. Rather than work against the constant desire for entertainment that exists in young 
people of all abilities, the museum could use these forms of entertainment to enhance knowledge 
about an exhibit. 
Utilizing games for educational purposes in museums is not a new concept; museums 
around the world are using digital games to enhance the visitor experience. One successful 
example of this is The Voyage, a game developed by The Australian National Maritime Museum 
in collaboration with Roar Films in Tasmania, Screensound Australia, and Screensound 
Tasmania.54 The Voyage allows the user to experience what it was like to take the historic 
journey from London to Van Diemen’s Land—now known as Tasmania—to transport British 
convicts to the island to work.55 The players are rewarded based on the number of healthy 
convicts they deliver to the British colony.56 Based on historical data, such as documented ship 
paths, medical records, and other documents relating to the convicts being transported, the 
players are able to learn about the great transportation of convicts from Britain to Australia in the 
1800s in a way that can be more entertaining than the traditional text panel or diorama.57 While 
                                                           
52 Damian Maher, “Connecting Classroom and Museum Learning with Mobile Devices,” Journal of Museum 
Education, 40 no. 3 (2015): 257–267. 
53 Maher, Journal of Museum Education, 257-267. 
54 L. Kelly & A. Bowan, “Gamifying the museum: Educational games for learning,” Museums and the Web Asia 
2014, ed. N. Proctor & R. Cherry, accessed Nov. 15, 2018, 
https://mwa2014.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/gamifying-the-museum-educational-games-for-learning/. 
55 Kelly and Bowan, Museums and the Web. 
56 Kelly and Bowan, Museums and the Web. 
57 Kelly and Bowan, Museums and the Web. 

 
19 
 
there is still much room for research and exploration of this topic, according to researchers, thus 
far the Australian National Maritime Museum has found success with the game and sees a high 
educational potential for this type of activity in an educational sphere, particularly for 
museums.58 
Utilizing digital games that are specific to a topic or area of a museum can be highly 
useful in engaging a twenty-first century audience, but it also has great potential for increasing 
accessibility for some visitors. Often, when a person with autism becomes overwhelmed with 
stimuli, the only available option is to leave and remove themselves from a situation. If an app 
could provide resources to help alleviate stressed caused by overwhelming stimuli, perhaps 
individuals would not need to remove themselves completely. They could simply put on their 
headphones, listen to some calming music, and play relaxing and educational games relating to 
the museum and its exhibitions. With an app like this, one could, in theory, navigate the museum 
at one’s own pace without having to worry about approaching a sensory overload.  
To summarize, by creating a museum-specific app to mediate education, museums can 
increase digital accessibility options for individuals with autism. The app could contain sensory-
friendly entertainment options, such as games or music, helpful tools to navigate the museum, 
such as maps or sensory guides, and offer other useful resources that can help ease social 
interaction for individuals on the autism spectrum. If a general template was created that could 
be modified for each individual museum’s needs, museums across the country could use the app 
to increase their accessible offerings for visitors on the autism spectrum and enable these 
individuals to attend the museum at times of their choice, not just during sensory-friendly days.  
 
                                                           
58 Kelly and Bowan, Museums and the Web. 

 
20 
 
Research Methodology  
 
To complete this project, it was necessary to research possible methods of development 
and begin the development of the app simultaneously. After doing preliminary research on 
assistive technology developed for individuals on the autism spectrum and on similar, 
preexisting approaches for accessible technology within both local and national museums, I 
brought my findings to Peter Laurin, a senior game design and develop student at RIT and the 
app developer on this project, and he began coding the app layout. Throughout the development 
process, we consistently held meetings to ensure that the new information and findings I came 
across in my research was applied to the app, so as to enhance the quality of its design and 
content.  
 
Once the prototype of the app was completed, I held two rounds of user testing. The first 
was with a general audience off-site, and the second was with our specific target audiences—
individuals on the autism spectrum and their families—on site at the Strong National Museum of 
Play.59 Following both of these rounds of user testing, participants filled out a Google Forms 
survey online to give their feedback on the quality and effectiveness of the app (Fig. 1 and Fig. 
2). In addition to the survey, after I conducted the user testing with the target audience, I held 
follow-up interviews with each participating family to ask more in-depth questions about their 
previous museum experiences, as well as to elaborate on the feedback they had given on the user 
testing survey they completed after their museum visit.60 Using the information collected from 
                                                           
59 Between the two rounds of user testing, the first being with a general audience, we took feedback and made 
changes to the app before conducting the second round of user testing. We did this to ensure that the user testing 
we conducted with our target audience would be with the best version of our app, both in respects to content and 
design. 
60 I chose not to conduct in-depth interviews with those participating in the first round of user testing. Their input 
was intended to help Peter and I refine the app before deploying with our target audience. Moreover, they did not 
comprise of my target audience for the app, children on the autism spectrum aged 4-12-years-old. 
 

 
21 
 
each round of user testing, I then evaluated the current prototype and compiled a list of 
improvements and changes to implement in future iterations of this app-concept. 
 
App Development Methodology 
Developing the Concept 
 
Seeing someone you love miss out on opportunities because of their disability can be 
infuriating, but, when these feelings are channeled effectively, can also be inspiring. The idea for 
SenseEase began with this feeling.  
 
My younger cousin, Leo, was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder when he was 
about 2-years-old. Since his diagnosis, my uncle and the rest of my family have done everything 
in our power to ensure that he has the same positive experiences as his neurotypical peers. He 
has been sledding, played on a Slip n’ Slide, and even went on a short Christmas tour at a 
museum to meet Santa Claus. All of the efforts we made to get him involved with the community 
and other children were successful, until one Christmas when we found our first glaring 
roadblock to his interpersonal interactions.  
 
Around Christmas in 2017, we decided to take him to the Strong National Museum of 
Play, and it did not go well. There were more visitors than usual because of the holiday breaks, 
meaning larger crowds around interactive exhibits and, most importantly, more noise. After two 
difficult hours at the museum, Leo finally had enough and hit his threshold of sensory 
stimulation. He was trying to enjoy himself, but the noise and the other children moving around 
him pushed him over the edge and, ultimately, we had to leave.  
 
In contrast to Leo’s experience, I fondly remembered how, growing up, my other family 
members and I loved the Strong Museum. We had so many great memories there, and knowing 

 
22 
 
that Leo would not be able to make his own memories at the museum broke my heart, 
particularly because of my background in museum studies. However, instead of accepting defeat 
and never bringing Leo to the museum again, I started thinking. What changes could I make to 
the museum experience that would enable Leo to have fun at the museum? How could I make 
museum experiences more manageable for him? Thus, the initial ideas that would become 
SenseEase were conceived. 
Choosing a medium 
When it came to choosing a medium, a mobile app to be used on a cellphone seemed the 
most obvious choice for a number of reasons. First, and most importantly, a mobile app allowed 
for more flexibility when it came to utilizing the app. Most people carry their phones in their 
pockets or purses, making the device easily accessible during a museum visit; the same cannot be 
said for other devices like laptops or tablets.  
When walking through a museum, it is unlikely that anyone would be carrying a laptop 
with them because they are large and not as easily used when one is moving from exhibit to 
exhibit. If this digital tool was to be created via a website, where visitors would need to access 
the content via a computer, it would render much of the site-specific content within the app 
useless. Additionally, if a child is on the verge of sensory overload and an emotional outburst, 
taking time to open a laptop, connect to WiFi, and navigate the website would take too much 
time and concentration. A similar argument can be made for tablets. While they are smaller and 
more mobile than a laptop, not all visitors may want to carry their tablet around a museum.61  
Another influencing factor behind my choice in medium was a study published in the 
journal, Computers in Human Behavior. Through their research, Lucila Maria Costi Santarosa 
                                                           
61 Our current design can work on any Android device that is able to download mobile apps, but it is optimized for 
cellphone-use. 

 
23 
 
and Débora Conforto found that touchscreens were preferred by individuals on the autism 
spectrum over laptop computers, which can be inaccessible for some individuals on the autism 
spectrum because the functions of the mouse, keyboard and screen may not be intuitive due to 
difficulties with sensory processing.62 In their case studies, they found that the children involved 
had difficulty connecting the movement of their hand to the cursor on the screen when using a 
laptop, but when using the touch screen, they had no issues interacting with the provided 
content.63 They concluded that a touch screen is a more effective method of interaction because 
the tablets are “operated with the use of a data input device which is very natural to humans: 
fingers.”64 They also found that the instantaneous response of a touch screen tablet was easier to 
facilitate interaction, as one simply needs to press one button to turn on the tablet and one to 
open the app rather than having to follow the multiple steps it takes to turn on a laptop and 
access information on a website.65 
Initial design 
 
I began thinking about the logistics of this in the summer of 2018, beginning with some 
minimal background research about different apps that my little cousin enjoyed and how I might 
adapt the methods employed by those apps to create my own. At the beginning of this process, as 
is always the case, SenseEase had lofty goals. Initially, the idea was to create one, catch-all app 
that could help visitors on the spectrum have a sensory-friendly experience at any given 
museum. While this would be wonderful in an ideal world, the idea was simply not realistic. 
Given the variations between types of content, the level of interactivity, and the general setting 
                                                           
62 Santarosa and Conforto, Computers in Human Behavior, 298. 
63 Santarosa and Conforto, Computers in Human Behavior, 298.; The study also noted that this would be ideal for 
users with autism who also have other physical disabilities, as touch screens are generally easier to physically 
interact with. 
64 Santarosa and Conforto, Computers in Human Behavior, 298. 
65 Santarosa and Conforto, Computers in Human Behavior, 298. 

 
24 
 
or environment of the museums just in the Rochester area, it became clear that one app would 
never be capable of serving different institutions across the United States, or the world for that 
matter.  
 
Throughout August and September 2018, I began to narrow down my goal from an 
unattainable deliverable to a feasible, year-long project. After discussing my ideas with my 
museum studies classmates and my research methods professor, Dr. Tamar Carroll, I decided to 
focus on creating an app for a single museum that had the potential to be recreated and adapted 
for other institutions. This left me with a decision: what museum should I use for my case study? 
 
To decide which museum would be the best environment to prototype SenseEase, I 
looked back on Leo’s experience and seriously considered the Strong Museum. However, before 
I made the decision, I interviewed representatives at the Strong Museum and two other local 
institutions and discussed their accessibility options for individuals on the autism spectrum: 
Cathy DeBellis, the Director of Public Programs at the Strong National Museum of Play; 
Kathryn Murano Santos, the Senior Director of Collections and Exhibitions at the Rochester 
Museum and Science Center; and Marlene Hamann-Whitmore, the McPherson Director of 
Academic Programs from the Memorial Art Gallery (Fig. 3).66 Overall, these museums were 
conscious of the need for more accessible and sensory-friendly options for visitors on the autism 
spectrum, but the museums were still in the early development stages of having regular 
programming catering to this specific audience. However, the Strong National Museum of Play 
was the furthest along in terms of developing sensory-friendly programming and ensuring that all 
staff members knew how to assist individuals on the autism spectrum and their families through 
training with Autism Up, a local autism awareness group. After these interviews and internal 
                                                           
66 These interviews were conducted in October and November of 2018. See Fig. 3 for the full article. 

 
25 
 
reflection on both my research and personal experiences, I decided that the Strong National 
Museum of Play would be the ideal environment to test this sensory app for three reasons: the 
interactive nature of the museum’s exhibits, their preexisting autism-specific programming, and 
the often loud and unique nature of the museum’s environment as a whole. 
 
The Strong Museum is unlike any traditional museum, often seeming borderline chaotic 
because of the museum’s younger clientele. However, the playful noisiness and constant streams 
of children that come through their doors are exactly what the Strong wants. Their mission is to 
“explore play and the ways in which it encourages learning, creativity, and discovery and 
illuminates cultural history.” In order to explore play, play must be encouraged; and that is 
exactly what they do.67 While this loud, playful environment attracts hundreds of children every 
week, it is not the ideal environment for those on the autism spectrum. The large crowds of 
parents and children, the sudden and uncontrollable noises, and being surrounded by strangers 
and their unpredictable behaviors can trigger severe emotional outbursts. Often, for children on 
the autism spectrum, once their sensory threshold is reached, as previously discussed, the only 
option is to remove the child from the triggering environment and give them time to return to 
their emotional baseline; which, while necessary, is not ideal for museums who want to share 
their collections and experiences with all visitors of all ages and abilities.  
 
In addition to the unique and chaotic environment, the Strong Museum made a good 
candidate for this prototype because of its preexisting resources for individuals on the autism 
spectrum and their families. The museum also provides: noise-cancelling headphones, which are 
available for visitors at their front desk; quiet areas for visitors who may need a break from the 
sensory stimulation; and “social stories,” or social narratives—pre-visit materials which provide 
                                                           
67 Strong National Museum of Play, "Mission," The Strong National Museum of Play, 30 Jan. 2019, accessed 12 Feb. 
2019, https://www.museumofplay.org/about/mission. 

 
26 
 
a visual walkthrough of the museum and shows what one can expect during a visit through 
photos, video, or text—which parents can use to help familiarize their children with how to 
navigate the museum.68 One of the newest additions to the Strong’s accessible offerings is the 
Sensory-Friendly Sunday program. Throughout the year, the museum hosts sensory-friendly 
events that are exclusively for individuals with autism or other similar developmental delays 
(Fig. 4). This allows for individuals on the spectrum to come to the museum before it officially 
opens and to explore the exhibits in a calmer environment. They dim the overhead and exhibit 
lighting, they lower the volume of interactive exhibit elements, and, ultimately, provide a space 
for children and parents to explore the museum at their own pace among others who share 
similar experiences without fearing judgement.69 Due to the Strong’s existing resources, I would 
be able to consult with the museum and build on these resources when curating content for my 
app. 
Once I made my decision to focus on the Strong Museum, it was time to flesh out exactly 
what my app would provide. I wanted to incorporate soothing elements that my cousin Leo used, 
such as soft music and games, but I needed to find more resources that would be helpful for 
children on the autism spectrum and their parents. I began by looking at the accessibility 
resources available on the Strong Museum website, particularly their social stories, so I could 
determine what supportive-materials I should include in the app beyond my games and music 
(Fig. 5). To get a more comprehensive understanding of what I might need to include in the app, 
                                                           
68 Felicia D. Swartzenberg, “Are Museums Accommodating Visitors on the Autism Spectrum?” 
69 Felicia D. Swartzenberg, “Are Museums Accommodating Visitors on the Autism Spectrum?,” Atavist, 12 Dec. 
2018, feliciadianne.atavist.com/asd_accessibility.; The Strong Museum always strives to promote a judgement-free 
environment for their institution. However, the point of providing a space exclusive to people on the autism 
spectrum and their caregivers is to help ease public interaction. Regardless of where they are, when people on the 
spectrum reach sensory-overload and have emotional outbursts it can draw attention and be met by judgement 
from those who do not have experience with or know anything about autism spectrum disorder. When surrounded 
by other parents who understand and share those fears, it can be comforting and help parents feel at ease even if 
their child does have an emotional outburst. 

 
27 
 
I expanded my research and looked at methods used by the Intrepid Sea, Air, and Space Museum 
Complex, an institution that has made many great strides toward accessibility for individuals on 
the autism spectrum (Fig. 6). Additionally, I looked at the sensory-friendly app that was 
developed for the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago as an example of what I should be striving for 
when creating the design and content for my app (Fig. 7). I also looked at other apps that are 
similar in nature, even if they were not created for a museum space, such as Magnus Cards, to 
see what features and functions were available. 
After completing my preliminary research, I decided I needed to include the following in 
my app: games, upbeat and soothing music, a sensory guide, a social narrative, a list of 
programming, and an explanation of what the app is supposed to accomplish. I also, at this point, 
amended the prototype’s title to read, SenseEase: Strong Museum, to show the connection 
between this iteration of the app and the institution we modeled it after. 
Connecting with an app developer 
 
In terms of actually programming the app, there were significant deficits in my personal 
skillset that were vital to creating the app. Mainly, I had none. With the assistance of my primary 
adviser, Dr. Juilee Decker, I was able to connect with Peter Laurin. Peter was a student in Dr. 
Decker’s Museums and the Digital Age class and, when approached about the project, he was 
eager to join the SenseEase: Strong Museum team as the app developer.   
 
Peter and I had our first official meeting in early September 2018, where we discussed 
the feasibility of the app I had theoretically designed. With his guidance and knowledge, we 
determined that it would be most feasible to focus on a single exhibit area within the museum if 
we were to develop a quality prototype. 

 
28 
 
 
To help us choose a specific area of the museum to focus on and develop ideas for what 
types of games we would include, Peter and I visited the Strong Museum on September 30, 
2018. During our site visit, we evaluated each exhibit with three things in mind: what is the level 
of chaos in this particular area, what area would make the best use of a digital experience, and 
what games within the existing exhibits might adapt well to a digital interface without 
completely changing the experience as a whole? We chose these questions based on the 
information I had obtained from interviews with Rachel Rosner, the Director of Education and 
Support at Autism Up (Fig. 8).70 Rosner heavily emphasized two necessities: having ample 
accommodations for individuals on the autism spectrum in areas that are typically very chaotic, 
and having those accommodations be as similar as possible to the experiences any other 
neurotypical child would have; or, in other words, ensuring that while they are having a slightly 
different experience, they would not be considered as “different” from their peers in a negative 
way. 
We listened for the noisiest rooms, but also made sure to choose an area where an app-
facilitated experience would make sense. For example, while the miniature Wegmans and large 
Sesame Street play area is loud and crowded, the interactions visitors have with these exhibits 
simply cannot be digitally manufactured due to their hands-on, physically interactive nature. 
They are all very tactile and are far more exciting when experienced in person. Ultimately, we 
agreed on creating the app around the Reading Adventure Land area on the first floor of the 
museum because it was quite loud but had several interactive elements that could be effectively 
translated into a digital format (Fig. 9). 
                                                           
70 Autism Up is a local autism support organization that helps provide a “Multi-Sensory Learning Environment for 
individuals with autism” and their families or caregivers. See Fig. 8 for more details about the organization. 

 
29 
 
The last question we asked ourselves was what games within the exhibits we might take 
inspiration from; which was possibly the most exciting aspect of our on-site research. To make 
our decision, we interacted with the different game offerings to see which would be feasible for 
us to recreate, enjoyable for our audience of children on the autism spectrum ranging from four 
to twelve-years-old, and applicable to the area we decided to focus on. After a few hours of fun, 
playful research, we settled on a goal of three games for the app: a character-matching game in 
which the user would flip over two cards at a time to find the matching pairs; an alphabet 
matching game where the user is shown a letter and a two to three photos and they must choose 
which photo contains a character or an object that starts with the letter being shown; and a 
spelling game where the user is shown a photo and a partially spelled-out word and they need to 
choose the remaining letters needed to finish spelling the word. The general ideas for the games 
were modeled after games that are actually featured throughout the museum, but they are not 
exact replications.  
Additionally, as we walked through the museum, I took preliminary notes that would 
help me create a sensory guide for the museum. In each exhibit area of the museum, I noted the 
prominent sensory-stimuli, potential sensory triggers, and areas where there was little or no 
overwhelming sensory input, like rest areas or reading nooks. Using this information, and more 
information gathered from later visits, I created a slideshow detailing what sensory stimuli to 
expect in each area of the museum so parents could learn where to avoid or where to go when 
their child needs a break, and a social narrative that would help parents and children learn what 
behaviors are expected at the museum. 
Due to various software set-backs, time, and resource restraints, we decided to change 
our goal for the prototype and chose not to include any games at this stage of development. 

 
30 
 
Rather than rushing to push out an app and a game, we wanted to focus on creating a fully 
functional app design without any bugs. Creating an app interface and a fully functional game 
was simply not possible within our given timeframe with only one app developer on our team. 
Creating the app 
After our initial visit, it was time to sit down and determine the exact content of the app. 
Once Peter and I agreed on a feasible design, we held regular meetings to discuss the evolution 
of: SenseEase Strong Museum. The first decisions we made were in regard to the general 
aesthetics of the app, such as color schemes and icon design. We chose a light blue for the app 
background color, because that color is associated with Autism Awareness Month, and rainbow-
colored icons, because the Autism Awareness Ribbon is a puzzle-piece pattern that is made up of 
different colors of the rainbow.71 For icon size and design, we decided to create square icons that 
measured to 144 x 144 pixels with printed text explaining the function of the icon.72 We also 
decided, based on a study published in the Journal of Medical Systems, to have all of the app 
functions be triggered by tapping motions rather than sliding motions, as tapping was found to be 
a more intuitive form of interaction for individuals on the autism spectrum.73  
 
When it came to the development software, Peter and I decided to use Android Studio, 
which Peter had experience in.74 Android’s platform was chosen for its easily accessible 
publishing software, which, in turn, allowed for easily accessible user testing opportunities. 
Additionally, I had access to two android devices, a smartphone and a tablet, to use for user 
                                                           
71 Autism Society, "The Autism Awareness Ribbon," Autism Society, accessed Feb 13, 2019, http://www.autism-
society.org/about-the-autism-society/history/autism-awareness-ribbon/. 
72 Quezada et al., “Usability Operations on Touch Mobile Devices for Users with Autism,” Journal of Medical 
Systems, 41 no. 184 (2017): 8. 
73 Quezada et al., Journal of Medical Systems, 6-9. 
74 Since we chose to use Android Studio, we also used JavaScript to code our interactive elements as it is the 
default code language in this particular development software. 

 
31 
 
testing, making this software a good choice.75 While this prototype can only operate on Android 
devices, this concept and template can be adapted to develop an iOS-compatible version of the 
app.  
 
When creating the wireframe of the app, we began by setting up an empty project within 
the Android software and an emulator to run a virtual android device on the PC so we could view 
how the wireframe would look on a mobile device. I began by making a sketch for what the 
home screen should look like, and Peter created the layout of the screen in an XML file, a 
metalanguage similar to HTML.76 He began by setting up the main toolbar at the top of the page, 
and then he proceeded to bring the sketched design to reality by adding the six icons labeled as 
follows: Music, Sensory Guide, Social Story, Settings, For Parents, and Games  (Fig. 10).77 
Before proceeding to the next step in the development process, Peter tested the code in the 
emulator to ensure that the design layout matched our original sketch. 
 
After making the basic wireframe, Peter began to add the functionality to the home 
screen. He made the icons clickable so they would open to their respective pages and tested each 
function in the emulator to ensure that all of them worked as expected.  After this was completed 
for each individual page, he created a downloadable Google Drive file that was ready for user 
testing.78 
                                                           
75 Since we did not register this app on the Google Play store, it was ideal to have it pre-downloaded on my devices 
for the second round of user testing due to security issues regarding downloading apps from unregistered or 
unknown sources. For the first round of user testing, due to the number of participants, most of them downloaded 
the app onto their own device, which is not typically best-practice. 
76 XML is a metalanguage, similar to HTML, which allows users to define their own customized markup languages. 
77 While we had made the decision to not develop games for this prototype, we chose to leave the option in our 
interface design so we could have a template that encompassed my full vision for this app, which, with more time 
and resources, would include interactive games relating to the museum exhibits. The game icons are not 
functional.  
78 Note that this is not best practice in terms of sharing app-files. We chose this method of dissemination because 
we were unable to register the game with the Google Play store in time for our two rounds of user testing. 

 
32 
 
We finished the interface and individual page design in December 2018, and finished the 
fully functional app interface in early February 2019. The final iteration of the SenseEase: 
Strong Museum prototype included: a home screen; a functional music player with four songs; a 
social story for entering the museum and navigating the Reading Adventure Land exhibit; a 
sensory guide for the museum; information about the app itself; the museum’s upcoming 
programs and the museum’s hours of operation (Fig. 11).  
 
User Testing Procedure 
 
To evaluate the functionality and effectiveness of this app, I conducted two rounds of 
user testing; the first with a general audience and the second with two families who have children 
diagnosed as being on the autism spectrum, my target audience. During the first round of user 
testing, Peter and I visited Dr. Juilee Decker’s Visitor Engagement class, which consisted of 
twenty-two students from various colleges within the university, including: the College of 
Liberal Arts, the College of Engineering Technology; the B. Thomas Golisano College of 
Computing and Information Sciences; the College of Art and Design; the Kate Gleason College 
of Engineering; the College of Health Sciences and Technology; and the School of 
Individualized Study. Dr. Decker’s class discusses visitor accessibility and interaction, so having 
her students test the first iteration of the prototype allowed us to gather feedback from people 
familiar with the subjects at hand, specifically museum studies and visitor accessibility. During 
their class time, students with Android devices were able to download the app via a Google 
Drive file and navigate the different pages at their own pace for about fifteen minutes.79 After the 
                                                           
79 For students without Android devices, we had one tablet available for use and printed hand-outs of the sensory 
guide and textual information from the app so they could still participate.  

 
33 
 
class finished exploring the app, the students were instructed to complete a survey in which they 
evaluated the concept, design, functionality, and overall effectiveness as a tool (findings 
referenced in the following section).   
 
During the second round of user testing, I was able to conduct the test on site at Strong 
Museum with two families: Roberta and Austin, who is ten-years-old, and Lindsay and Preston, 
who is seven-years-old.80 As an incentive to be involved with this user testing, the families 
received free admission to the museum on the day of the visit. Each family was able to review 
the app before visiting the museum and utilize the interactive components of the app throughout 
their museum visit with a particular focus on Reading Adventure Land, given the prototype’s 
focus. After they were able to use the app at the museum, each family filled out a visitor survey 
that detailed their experience with the app and its effectiveness. After reviewing their feedback, I 
followed up with each family and conducted individual interviews to ask about their previous 
museum experiences, get a more in-depth description of how this app affected their museum 
experience, and ask for more details as to why they did or did not consider this an effective tool 
and guide for the museum.  
While this user testing pool may seem small, the choice was purposeful, as I wanted to 
engage in pre- and follow-up interviews with each family to get as much qualitative data about 
their previous museum experiences and how using SenseEase: Strong Museum affected their 
visit. 
 
 
                                                           
80 Both families requested that their last names be redacted from this public document. 

 
34 
 
User Testing Findings 
First Round: General Audience 
 
The results of the first test with a general audience, Dr. Juilee Decker’s Visitor 
Engagement students, were generally positive (Fig. 12).  The students found that the app 
installation speed was consistent with other apps they had experience with, they found the app 
fairly easy to navigate, and they thought the aesthetic and appearance of the app was a good fit 
for my target audience. When asked for possible improvements or additions, the students 
suggested: changing the name of the app, which was originally Project Ease, to something that 
sounded less professional and more kid friendly, like SenseEase: Strong Museum; changing the 
original music options we had on the app, which were a mixture of lullabies and nursery rhymes, 
to songs that were generally more calming, like classical and instrumental music; adding 
additional content, such as a floor map of the museum, an interactive map of each exhibition area 
with details about each individual exhibit, additional videos and multimedia content about the 
exhibits, the museum’s hours of operation; and adding an option that allows you to provide direct 
feedback to the museum about the exhibit or the app itself.  
In addition to having the class fill out the Google Forms survey, I visited the class the 
following day to seek additional comments and opinions about the app. During this meeting, 
students suggested: reorganizing the sensory guide and either implementing a grid-design, which 
would allow users to select areas of personal interest, or changing the order of the guide from 
being alphabetical to being in the order in which visitors would encounter them at the museum; 
providing a video walk-through or voiceover for the social story; verifying and adjusting the 
colors, if need be, to ensure that the design is accessible to those who may be colorblind; and 
separating the app into two sections, “Pre-visit” and “At the Museum,” so the content needed to 

 
35 
 
prepare for the museum and the content meant to be used on site would be separate and their 
purposes would be clear.  
After reviewing their feedback and before proceeding with the second round of user 
testing, Peter and I held a meeting and determined what suggested revisions would be feasible to 
implement before our next user testing date. We decided to adjust the design of the social story 
and sensory guide, change the available music to classical and instrumental options, and verify 
that the colors of the background and font within the app were distinct enough so those who are 
colorblind would not have an issue reading the text. 
Second Round: Target Audience 
 
After each family visited the Strong Museum of Play, they filled out the online Google 
Forms survey (Fig. 13). After reviewing their survey responses, I held individual, in-person 
interviews with them to ask about their previous museum experiences, how the app would have 
been helpful if they had it during their previous visits, and to elaborate on the answers they gave 
on the online survey.  
 
When I interviewed the first family to use the app, Roberta and Austin (age 10), and 
asked about their museum experiences, they were generally positive with a few negative 
memories scattered throughout their previous visits. Roberta, Austin’s mother, noted that, most 
often, Austin’s negative reactions were brought on by being in large crowds or lines, being in a 
certain place for too long and getting overwhelmed or tired, and when he was getting hungry. 
When asked about why something like this would be important for children on the autism 
spectrum and their families, she said “it would make things a lot easier and less stressful. 
Usually, when Austin gets upset, we go to another area of the museum or just leave. We might 
not have to leave if this app could help him work through those feelings instead.”  

 
36 
 
When thinking of suggestions for improvements, Roberta and Austin felt that the 
following would be valuable additions to the app: changing the music to include genres that are 
more exciting, like Jazz or children’s songs, as Austin found the calming instrumentals boring; a 
section dedicated to the food options that are available at the museum so families can plan to 
bring lunches if necessary81; Bluetooth proximity beacon notifications to provide both general 
information about what is available in each exhibit and sensory information about what to expect 
in each area; games similar to “Tetris,” “Candy Crush,” and other puzzles for children on the 
older end of the four to twelve spectrum; counting videos or videos about different exhibits in the 
museum for children to use while waiting in line to help them practice being patient; and a 
reward system set up like a scavenger-hunt, where children can be offered prizes, such as a free 
ice cream or a five dollar gift card to the gift shop, if they travel and digitally “check in” at 
different exhibits at the museum to encourage children to explore more of the museum, rather 
than getting caught up in one or two areas. 
When I interviewed the second family, both Lindsay, the mother, and Preston (age 7) 
gave overwhelmingly positive feedback about the app. They were particularly pleased with the 
social story and sensory guide. Lindsay expressed that if she had access to this type of resource 
during their other museum experiences, it would have helped alleviate some of the stressors they 
encountered during their visit. Similar to the triggers Austin experienced most often, Preston 
often acted out and was uncomfortable when faced with large crowds, when they had to do a lot 
of walking or if it was too hot or cold in a space—this is specific to their outdoor museum 
experiences—and when he got hungry.  
                                                           
81 Due to sensory issues, many individuals on the autism spectrum have limited diets and are picky about what 
they will eat. 

 
37 
 
For Lindsay and Preston, the feature on this app that helped them the most, and would 
have been helpful in their previous museum visits, was having access to information about quiet 
areas where they can go to when Preston needed a break or to get away from his sensory triggers. 
Lindsay emphasized this point many times both in the Google Forms survey and the interview, 
expressing that “it’s easy to forget about quiet spaces to escape to when your child is in the 
middle of a meltdown, and if we could plan what exhibits we wanted to visit ahead of time using 
the app, we would be more prepared for what we would see and it would not just be a free-for-
all.”82 
Lindsay and Preston did not have too many suggestions for improvements, but they did 
indicate that having additional photos and information of what the exhibit interior looked like 
would be helpful so families could get a better idea of exactly what to expect in each space, 
particularly for the short-term exhibits in the Strong’s Fidelis Care Gallery. They also suggested 
adding a video walkthrough option for the social story to provide a more in-depth, realistic 
picture of what families can expect when they go to the museum. 
One suggested improvement that was expressed by both families was to offer an option 
on the app that allowed the user to choose content based on their age range. While the Strong 
Museum and, therefore, this app aims to cater to children of all ages, there are definite 
differences in taste and interest that are age-dependent. For example, Austin, age ten, did not like 
the idea of listening to children’s music, such as Baby Shark or other nursery rhymes, but 
expressed that the options should be provided for younger children like his little cousin. There 
would also be differences in the types of interactive games the varying age groups would like. A 
                                                           
82 Lindsay, interview by Felicia Swartzenberg, in-person interview, Rochester, N.Y., March 26, 2019. 

 
38 
 
four-year-old may enjoy a matching game, but a ten-year-old could find the simple game to be 
boring and it may not hold their attention.  
Overall, the app was well-received by my target audience. With further work and 
improvements on this prototype, SenseEase: Strong Museum could be a very useful tool that the 
Strong Museum, or any other museum, could adopt to enhance their relationships with visitors 
on the spectrum and their local autism communities. 
 
Future Development and Adoption 
 
When I first conceived of this project, my goal was to create a tool that could be used in 
any museum space that would help alleviate stress and provide a more comfortable visitor 
experience for children on the autism spectrum. While this goal was unattainable through the 
development of a single app, this prototype provides a template for other museums to adopt a 
similar tool for their own individual museum environments. By obtaining the template from 
Peter and I, any museum can create their own version of SenseEase: Strong Museum. While the 
cost of hiring an app developer may seem daunting, by presenting them with a preexisting design 
or code (which can be obtained from myself and Peter on a case-by-case basis) they would not 
need to dedicate as much time to the wireframe development.83 Therefore, a museum would only 
need to pay for the costs of modifying the template to fit each individual museums’ needs and 
inputting or creating content that is site-specific to the museum.84  
                                                           
83 Our design is purposefully simple and easily adaptable so other institutions can adopt and individualize our basic 
interface design. Furthermore, because the colors and interface are not necessarily specific to Strong Museum, an 
institution would not need to change the overall design if they chose to adopt this digital tool and are happy with 
the current design. 
84 I created or collected all of the content that is available on the app and Peter designed the interface of the app. 
So, in terms of content, a staff member would be able to create most things and the developer would only need to 
create games or any additional multimedia feature that is outside of the staff’s skillset.  

 
39 
 
 
If a museum were to consider adopting this app template, I would recommend further 
development to implement a number of suggestions that my user testing participants gave in their 
feedback. Particularly, I would recommend: providing different content options, in terms of 
games and music, for different age groups so, regardless of their age, children will be interested 
and engaged with the app; adding additional music that is a mixture of calming instrumentals, 
upbeat modern music, and fun children’s songs, as the calming instrumental alone was not well 
received by the younger participants; implementing a grid-design for the social story and sensory 
guide so people can pick and choose what sections they want to see rather than having to scroll 
through the entire slideshow of material; providing a video walkthrough as an additional method 
of consuming the social story content, which allows for better and more in-depth visuals than a 
simple photo; including a section on the For Parents page dedicated to the food options that are 
available at the museum so families can plan to bring lunches if necessary; creating content for 
Bluetooth proximity beacons that provide both general information about what is available in 
each exhibit and sensory information about what to expect in each area; and providing counting 
videos or videos about different exhibits in the museum for children to use while waiting in line 
to help them practice being patient. 
Conclusion 
 
Historically, museums have put maintaining a beautiful and pristine collection as their 
top priority. Today, the professional community has shifted from collections-focused to 
community-focused mindsets because museums have come to recognize that an institution that 
does not serve the public is not an effective, or even necessary, institution. In her book The 
Social Work of Museums, Lois Silverman explains: “As the climate of accountability worldwide 
has pressured museums to justify their worth, it is not surprising, but rather inevitable, that they 

 
40 
 
are acting upon a growing awareness of their broadest potential: what we might call the social 
work of museums.”85 An important part of meeting societal standards for accessibility and 
maintaining the “social work of museums” is ensuring that the museum and its collections are 
accessible to all visitors regardless of backgrounds, ages, abilities, and beliefs.  
Most, if not all, museums in the United States—and globally—have made efforts to 
ensure they serve all types of visitors. Some, like the Rochester Museum and Science Center, 
develop programming and change their exhibit designs to become more accessible on site. 
Others, like the Strong National Museum of Play, work with local advocacy organizations that 
represent various populations in need of accessibility accommodations to ensure that they are 
serving their community and meeting people’s needs effectively. Some have even joined larger 
initiatives in the museum professional world to ensure both their institution and other local 
institutions are doing all they can to implement more accessible policies that are sensitive to the 
needs of their communities. Organizations like the Museum Access Consortium and the Chicago 
Cultural Accessibility Consortium bring museum professionals together to discuss topics related 
to accessibility and how individual institutions and staff can become more accessible for all types 
of visitors.86 The formation of organizations like this both propagates the importance of 
accessible programming and highlights the validity and necessity of these resources by showing 
how community members positively react to them. 
 
In terms of accessibility programming and resources for individuals on the autism 
spectrum specifically, many museums are still in the early stages of even developing resources; 
                                                           
85 Lois H. Silverman, The Social Work of Museums (New York: Routledge, 2010), 14.  
 
86 Chicago Cultural Accessibility Consortium, "About Us," CCAC, accessed March 20, 2019, 
https://www.chicagoculturalaccess.org/about-us; Museum Access Consortium, "About MAC," Museum Access 
Consortium, accessed March 20, 2019, https://macaccess.org/about-new/.  

 
41 
 
but that does not make these resources any less necessary than accessibility ramps for people in 
wheelchairs or providing translations for those who do not speak English. However, there are 
inclusive solutions that can complement separate programming for individuals on the spectrum. 
While sensory-friendly days can be very helpful when first introducing a child to a new museum 
environment, a by-product of this exclusive safe space is that it essentially segregates the 
population of visitors on the autism spectrum from the rest of museum visitors. By utilizing an 
app like SenseEase: Strong Museum, autistic museum visitors would not feel excluded and could 
enjoy the museum at any time like their neurotypical counterparts. This app would not be able to 
completely replace sensory-friendly days or other resources for individuals on the spectrum, as 
both of these are incredibly valuable in their own right, but it would be an addition that would 
make people feel less like a “special” guest, and more like a regular visitor. 
Overall, the results of the user testing conducted with the app’s target audience was 
highly positive, and both families felt that the app has great potential to help children on the 
autism spectrum and their families navigate chaotic or unfamiliar museums; particularly the 
social story and sensory guide. They found the app’s design and content easily navigable and 
intuitive to use, they felt the app helped them have a more comfortable and sensory-friendly 
experience at the museum, and they felt the app provided helpful content that their child could 
use when they began to feel overwhelmed or stressed. Most importantly, they indicated that they 
would recommend this app to other parents who have children on the autism spectrum—and 
parents of young children in general—as they felt it contained helpful information and 
interactive content. After reviewing all of the user testing feedback, I have concluded that a 
mobile application can indeed help visitors with autism have a more comfortable, positive, and 
accessible museum experience. 

 
42 
 
In the words of museum studies scholar Susan Davis Baldino, “inclusion benefits autistic 
students by eradicating inequities. Perhaps, more importantly, it benefits all students, autistic and 
non-autistic, by expanding individuals’ experiences of difference in ways that diminish 
prejudice.”87 By providing a digital tool that allows visitors on the autism spectrum to be 
engaged and included like their neurotypical counterparts, museums will benefit from two 
desirable outcomes: their institution will become a welcoming and less intimidating space for 
individuals on the autism spectrum and their families will feel comfortable attending the museum 
more often; and, by allowing for more people on the spectrum to visit and be visible in their 
museum space, other museum visitors will be made aware that there are visitors with different 
abilities and, in theory, stereotypes or prejudices they had about individuals on the autism 
spectrum may be erased.  
 
 
                                                           
87  Susan Davis Baldino, “Museums and Autism: Creating an inclusive community for learning,” in Museums, 
Equality and Social Justice, edited by Richard Sandell and Eithne Nightingale, (New York: Routledge, 2012), 172. 

 
43 
 
Appendix – Images and Photographs 
Fig. 1: A screenshot of the Google Forms survey given to the Visitor Engagement students. See 
the full survey here: https://forms.gle/7g4t98FpxzW9sVHV8.  
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
44 
 
Fig. 2: A screenshot of the Google Forms survey given to the two families who participated in 
user testing. See the full survey here: https://forms.gle/67ZPZcjkUYfVk7J3A.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
45 
 
Fig. 3: A screenshot of an article written by the author about accessibility for visitors at three 
large museums in Rochester, N.Y. Read the full article here: 
https://feliciadianne.atavist.com/asd_accessibility.  
 
 
 

 
46 
 
 
Fig. 4: A screenshot of the Strong National Museum of Play’s website which features 
information about their Sensory-Friendly Sunday program. For more information, go to: 
https://www.museumofplay.org/calendar/sensory-friendly-sunday.  
 
 
 
 

 
47 
 
Fig. 5: A screenshot of the Strong National Museum of Play’s Social Story. For more 
information and a list of the Strong’s Social Stories, go to 
https://www.museumofplay.org/visit/accessibility.
 

 
48 
 
Fig. 6: A screenshot of the Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum’s website which features details 
about their accessibility resources. For more information, go to: 
https://www.intrepidmuseum.org/education/accessibility-resources. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
49 
 
Fig. 7: A screenshot of the Shedd Aquarium’s website which features information about the 
museum’s sensory-friendly app. For more information, go to: 
https://www.sheddaquarium.org/plan-a-visit/visitor-guide/Accessibility/sensory-friendly-app/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
50 
 
Fig. 8: A screenshot of the “About” page on Autism Up’s website. For more information, go to: 
https://autismup.org/about-us. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
51 
 
Fig. 9: The Reading Adventure Land exhibit at Strong National Museum of Play in Rochester., 
N.Y. Photo by author, October 8, 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
52 
 
Fig. 10: The home screen of SenseEase: Strong Museum. 
 
 
 
 

 
53 
 
Fig. 11: Top, from left: Music page Social Story main page; Sensory Guide main page. Bottom: 
For Parents page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
54 
 
Fig. 12: Screenshots of data from the first round of user testing data with Dr. Juilee Decker’s 
Visitor Engagement class. 
 
 
 

 
55 
 
 
 
 

 
56 
 
 
 
 

 
57 
 
Fig. 13: Screenshots of data from the second round of user testing with my target audience, 
Roberta and Austin, and Lindsay and Preston. 
 

 
58 
 
 

 
59 
 
 

 
60 
 
 

 
61 
 
 

 
62 
 
 

 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
64 
 
Bibliography 
 
ADA: Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990. Public Law 101-336. § III. 108th Congress, 2nd 
session. (July 26, 1990). 
ADA: Standards for Accessible Design. Department of Justice. (September 15, 2010). 
American Alliance of Museums. “Characteristics of Excellence.” (1993). 
Autism Society. "The Autism Awareness Ribbon." Autism Society. Accessed Feb 13, 2019. 
http://www.autism-society.org/about-the-autism-society/history/autism-awareness-
ribbon/. 
Baldino, Susan Davis. “Museums and Autism: Creating an inclusive community for learning.” In 
Museums, Equality and Social Justice. Edited by Richard Sandell and Eithne Nightingale, 
169-180. New York: Routledge, 2012. 
Boston Museum of Science. “Accessibility.” Accessed Nov. 30, 2018, 
https://www.mos.org/accessibility.  
Boston Museum of Science. “Universal Design Plan for Exhibit Design & Development.” 
Accessed Nov. 30, 2018. https://www.mos.org/sites/dev-
elvis.mos.org/files/docs/misc/MOS_UD_Plan.pdf.  
Boston Museum of Science. “Universal Design for Museum Learning Experiences: Resources 
for museum professionals on employing a universal design approach for exhibits, 
programs, and evaluation.” Accessed Nov. 30, 2018. 
https://www.mos.org/UniversalDesign.  

 
65 
 
Chicago Cultural Accessibility Consortium. "About Us." CCAC. Accessed March 20, 2019. 
https://www.chicagoculturalaccess.org/about-us.  
Cohen, Shirley. Targeting Autism: What We Know, Don't Know, and Can Do to Help Young 
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Berkeley: University of California, 2007. 
Grandin, Temple. “Calming Effects of Deep Touch Pressure in Patients with Autistic Disorder, 
College Students, and Animals.” Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 
2, no. 1 (1992). 
Hosler, Ashley. “Museum Access for All: Engaging Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders.” 
In Engagement and Access: Innovative Approaches for Museums, edited by Juilee 
Decker, 27-34. London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015. 
Intrepid Museum. “Online Resources: Plan Your Visit," Accessibility Resources. Intrepid 
Museum. Last modified 2018,  https://www.intrepidmuseum.org/education/accessibility-
resources. 
Intrepid Museum. “Social Narrative." Accessibility Resources. Last modified 2018,  
https://www.intrepidmuseum.org/education/accessibility-resources. 
Kelly, L. and A. Bowan, “Gamifying the museum: Educational games for learning,” in Museums 
and the Web Asia 2014, edited by N. Proctor & R. Cherry. Silver Spring: Museums and 
the Web, 2014. 
https://mwa2014.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/gamifying-the-museum-educational-games-for-
learning/.  

 
66 
 
Kientz, Juile A., Matthew S. Goodwin, Gillian R. Hayes, and Gregory D. Abowd. “Interactive 
Technologies for Autism,” ed. Ronald M. Baecker. Morgan Claypool Publishers, 2014. 
Lindsay. Interview by Felicia Swartzenberg. In-person interview. Rochester, N.Y., March 26, 
2019. 
Magnus Cards. “MagnusCards: An Autism Life Skills & Transition Support Tool.” Accessed 
Oct. 14, 2018. https://magnusmode.com/magnuscards-an-autism-life-skills-transition-
support-tool/#about-section.  
Maher, Damian. “Connecting Classroom and Museum Learning with Mobile Devices.” Journal 
of Museum Education, 40, no. 3 (2015): 257–267. 
Martin, Charlotte. “Museums in Motion Today,” in in Edward P. Alexander, Mary Alexander, 
and Juilee Decker,  Museums in Motion: An Introduction to the History and Functions of 
Museums. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2017, 306-307. 
Museum Access Consortium. "About MAC." Museum Access Consortium. Accessed March 20, 
2019. https://macaccess.org/about-new/.  
Nason, Bill. “Part III: Sensory Issues in Autism.” In Autism Discussion Page on the Core 
Challenges of Autism: A Toolbox for Helping Children with Autism Feel Safe, Accepted, 
and Competent, 129-196. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2014. 
Pender, Terry. “Startup’s digital cards helps people with special needs navigate daily life.” The 
Record, Feb. 21, 2015. https://www.therecord.com/news-story/5440793-startup-s-digital-
cards-helps-people-with-special-needs-navigate-daily-life/.  

 
67 
 
Santarosa, L.M.C. and Conforto, Debora. “Educational and digital inclusion for subjects with 
autism spectrum disorders in 1:1 technological configuration.” Computers in Human 
Behavior 60 (2016): 293-300. 
Shrikant, Aditi. “How Museums Are Becoming More Sensory-Friendly For Those With 
Autism.” Smithsonian Magazine, January 5, 2018. 
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/how-museums-are-becoming-more-
sensory-friendly-for-those-with-autism-180967740/.  
Strong National Museum of Play. "Mission." The Strong National Museum of Play. January 30, 
2019. Accessed February 12, 2019. https://www.museumofplay.org/about/mission. 
Silverman, Lois H. The Social Work of Museums, 1-23. New York: Routledge, 2010. 
Starr, Ruth Erin. “Accessibility Practices & the Inclusive Museum: Legal Compliance, 
Professional Standards, and the Social Responsibility of Museums.” Bachelor’s thesis, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2016. 
Swartzenberg, Felicia D. “Are Museums Accommodating Visitors on the Autism Spectrum?” 
Atavist. Dec. 12 2018. feliciadianne.atavist.com/asd_accessibility. 
Quezada, Angeles, Reyes Juárez-Ramírez, Samantha Jiménez, Alan Ramírez Noriega, Sergio 
Inzunza, and Arnulfo Alanis Garza. “Usability Operations on Touch Mobile Devices for 
Users with Autism.” Journal of Medical Systems, 41, no. 184 (2017): 1-11.  
 

