See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366360248
What facilitates or constrains co-creation in museums? The case of people
with visual impairments
Article  in  Disability & Society · December 2022
DOI: 10.1080/09687599.2022.2157704
CITATIONS
0
READS
188
3 authors:
Susana Vasconcelos Mesquita
University of Aveiro
13 PUBLICATIONS   123 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Ana Caldeira
University of Coimbra
40 PUBLICATIONS   428 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Maria João Carneiro
University of Aveiro
180 PUBLICATIONS   3,238 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Susana Vasconcelos Mesquita on 05 January 2023.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cdso20
Disability & Society
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cdso20
What facilitates or constrains co-creation
in museums? The case of people with visual
impairments
Susana Mesquita, Ana Caldeira & Maria João Carneiro
To cite this article: Susana Mesquita, Ana Caldeira & Maria João Carneiro (2022): What facilitates
or constrains co-creation in museums? The case of people with visual impairments, Disability &
Society, DOI: 10.1080/09687599.2022.2157704
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2022.2157704
Published online: 16 Dec 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 57
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

Disability & Society
What facilitates or constrains co-creation 
in  museums? The case of people with visual 
impairments
Susana Mesquitaa 
, Ana Caldeirab 
 and Maria João Carneiroa 
aDEGEIT and GOVCOPP Research Unit, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; bFaculty of Arts and 
Humanities, CEGOT – Centre of Studies on Geography and Spatial Planning, University of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal
ABSTRACT
The awareness that museums must be inclusive and partic-
ipatory led to practices adapted to visitors’ requirements 
and co-creative experiences, encouraging interaction with 
exhibitions, and thus fostering memorable experiences. Yet, 
constraints remain for people with disabilities, reducing their 
satisfaction and desire to return. Despite the high number 
of people with visual impairments worldwide, there is a lack 
of research on factors that may impact their co-creation in 
museums. This paper aims to identify factors influencing the 
co-creation of people with visual impairments experiences 
in museums, either facilitating or constraining it. Based on 
focus groups discussion, the results of the study conducted 
suggest that the co-creation of people with visual impair-
ments in museums is influenced both by aspects related to 
visitors, as well as by disabling features of the museums’ 
physical, communicational, and attitudinal environments. 
Conclusions and implications drawn are critical to improve 
the experience of people with visual impairments in 
museums.
Points of interest
•	
This article highlights that despite the high number of people with 
visual impairments worldwide, many still face constraints when vis-
iting museums.
•	
The article reveals that several museums offer opportunities for inter-
acting with the whole museum environment and co-creating value, 
to trigger memorable experiences.
•	
This paper fills a research gap by analysing how a set of factors influ-
ence people with visual impairments to get involved in co-creation 
in museums, either facilitating or constraining it.
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Susana Mesquita 
 smvm@ua.pt
https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2022.2157704
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 5 August 2021
Accepted 6 December 2022
KEYWORDS
Museums; people with 
disabilities; people with 
visual impairments; 
co-creation experience; 
constraints; tourism

2
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
•	
The research found that the factors that influence co-creation of expe-
riences of people with visual impairments in museums can be related 
to the visitors or to the museums, including physical, communicational 
and attitudinal aspects.
•	
The article provides guidelines to improve the co-creation in museums 
of people with visual impairments.
Introduction
According to the World Health Organization (2019), at least 2.2 billion people 
have a vision impairment: blindness or low vision. In many contexts, people 
with disabilities face additional difficulties and require a higher degree of 
accessibility.
As social and cultural environments, museums are of great value to society, 
increasing accessibility to culture and providing leisure and socialization 
opportunities. In this way, they promote social cohesion, inclusion, and 
minimize discrimination. Yet, even if museums managers have increased 
inclusion efforts in recent decades, much work still needs to be done. 
Museums, as agents of social change in the community, are able to develop 
trend-setting practices towards social inclusion (Cachia 2013; Falk and 
Dierking 2016; Goulding 2000; Mesquita and Carneiro 2016; Poria, Reichel, 
and Brandt 2009), as well as contribute to reframe the way society view 
disabilities (Research Centre for Museums and Galleries, 2020). Co-creation 
in museums is becoming a relevant topic (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 
2018; de Rojas and Camarero 2008; Kempiak et  al. 2017; Mesquita and 
Carneiro 2016; Poria, Reichel, and Brandt 2009). Involving an effort among 
suppliers to create experiences collaboratively with the consumer (Minkiewicz, 
Evans, and Bridson 2014), co-creation is a process that requires action by 
both suppliers and customers (Frow & Payne, 2011; Pera et  al., 2016). To 
promote it, it is necessary to study customer behaviours to better adapt the 
spaces to the current needs of visitors. The functions of museums evolved, 
and specially education and entertainment, should be carried out boosting 
audience engagement and offering satisfying experiences (Black 2012).
To date, in the context of museums, a small number of researchers have 
analysed accessibility perceptions of people with visual impairments, with 
influencing factors and aspects of their co-creation being examined in a 
fragmented way (Grandi and Gomes 2017; Hetherington 2015; Mesquita and 
Carneiro 2016; Poria, Reichel, and Brandt 2009; Richards, Pritchard, and 
Morgan 2010). Additionally, they do not expressly refer to ‘co-creation’ and 
provide a limited view on issues influencing the co-creation of museum 
experiences by people with visual impairments.
There is a notable gap in empirical studies identifying a comprehensive 
set of factors that affect the way people with visual impairments co-create 

Disability & Society
3
their museum experiences. Considering this research gap, the aim of this 
paper is to raise knowledge in this field by identifying the antecedents of 
people with visual impairments’ co-creation in museums, as well as to analyse 
the effect of these factors in their dynamic process of co-creation.
The article is structured as follows. First, a literature review about 
co-creation and factors that can influence co-creation in museums by people 
with visual impairments is presented. Subsequently, the data collection and 
data analysis methods used in the empirical study are described. Next, there 
is an analysis and discussion of results, followed by the presentation of 
conclusions, implications, and suggestions for future research.
Co-creation in museums
Despite the already large amount of research on the subject, there is no 
consensual definition of co-creation nor a complete consensus regarding its 
facets. The concept of co-creation was first used by Prahalad and Ramaswamy 
(2004) as value created by the interaction between a company and consum-
ers. Two years later, this concept was introduced in tourism by Binkhorst 
(2006, 9), underlying that ‘during the creative process of developing tourism 
experience environments, both the host environment as well as (potential) 
visitors to the area should play a key role’. Prebensen, Kim, and Uysal (2016, 
1) explored the concept ‘as the tourist’s interest in mental and physical 
participation in activity’. The research in the field of co-creation studies 
processes that involve ‘both production and the consumption rather than 
focusing on either one (production) or the other (consumption)’ (Ritzer and 
Jurgenson 2010, 13). The interaction between all stakeholders is of primary 
importance, with consumers being described as co-creators of value (Li and 
Petrick 2008). Despite the variety of theoretical approaches and perspectives, 
there is consensus on the prerequisite forms for co-creation. The combination 
of ‘participation’, ‘involvement’ and ‘engagement’ has been found in most of 
the studies about co-creation (Mohammadi et  al. 2021).
Museums are important places for obtaining information and increasing 
knowledge. Their functions evolved from a focus on collections, to the pro-
vision of other services for visitors including entertainment (Mirghadr et  al. 
2018). Several museums offer opportunities for interacting with the whole 
museum environment and co-creating value, in orderv to trigger memorable 
experiences. Hence, various museums offer visitors the opportunity to interact 
with objects by touch (Cachia 2013; Hetherington 2015; Mehmetoglu and 
Engen 2011; vom Lehn 2010), participate in workshops (Antón, Camarero, and 
Garrido 2018; Asakawa et  al. 2018; Kempiak et  al. 2017; Mehmetoglu and 
Engen 2011; Minkiewicz, Evans, and Bridson 2014; Mirghadr et  al. 2018) or 
enjoy rich audio descriptions of the space, as well as of the artefacts presented 
in the exhibition (Asakawa et  al. 2018; Salmen 1998; Udo and Fels 2010).

4
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Works such as that of Falk and Dierking (2016), who propose the model 
of learning or the ‘interactive experience model’, shed light on factors that 
can increase co-creation in museums. However, despite the importance that 
co-creation may assume in museums, research on co-creation in museums 
and on factors that may influence this co-creation is scarce (Cachia 2013; 
Falk and Dierking 2016; Goulding 2000; Mesquita and Carneiro 2016; Mirghadr 
et  al. 2018). The factors that may influence the co-creation of the museum 
experiences of people with visual impairments will be discussed in the next 
section.
Factors that influence co-creation in museums in the case of 
people with visual impairments
Some factors drive visitors towards goals and work as facilitators, while 
others act as constraints, hindering performance of the activity (Lewin 1946). 
Studying antecedents, both facilitators and constraints, experienced by 
museum visitors is vital in understanding why people participate in activities 
during visits to museums or not, or engage in some way with the exhibitions 
and co-create their own experiences, which may affect their satisfaction 
(Kotler and Kotler 2000; Lee and Smith 2015; Mehmetoglu and Engen 2011). 
Nevertheless, only a few articles explicitly focus on the facilitators and con-
straints felt by visitors during their visits to museums (Blume-Kohout, Leonard, 
and Novak-Leonard 2015; J. Jun, Kyle, and O’Leary 2011; S. Jun and Lee 
2014; Mullens and Glorieux 2019; Udo and Fels 2010; vom Lehn 2010), but 
they do not specifically address co-creation. Also, few researchers (Asakawa 
et  al. 2018; Mesquita and Carneiro 2016; Poria, Reichel, and Brandt 2009) 
examine constraints that prevent people with visual impairments from par-
ticipating in the museum’s experiences.
Two main types of individual antecedents of co-creation of museum 
experiences emerge from the literature on museums and on people with 
visual impairments: (i) those related to the visitor, and (ii) those related to 
the museum. In the former case, visitors’ antecedents are described as both 
exclusively intrinsic to the individual, such as the level of impairment, as 
well as derived from the individual visit context (e.g. travel companion, the 
individual’s knowledge about museums). In turn, in the latter case, museum 
factors refer to the physical or other environments or aspects of the entity 
being visited.
Personal antecedents
Among factors that prevent or stimulate co-creation, some authors (Crawford 
and Godbey 1987; Luckerhoff et al. 2008; Smith 1987) have mentioned indi-
viduals’ psychological state, physical functioning level or cognitive ability, 

Disability & Society
5
which are particularly important aspects among people with disabilities. 
Different types of disabilities induce distinct constraints (Lehto et  al. 2018) 
and have different impacts on visitors’ experiences (Buhalis and Darcy 2011). 
Disabilities, according to their nature and degree, may bring constraints to 
tourism in general, and to the co-creation of experiences in museums in 
particular (Goss et  al. 2015; Hillis 2005; Mesquita and Carneiro 2016; Poria, 
Reichel, and Brandt 2009; Richards, Pritchard, and Morgan 2010). However, 
it is important to consider that there has been a change in the way society 
views disabilities over time, although there is still no agreement over the 
correct way to approach disabilities. The different ‘models of disability’ are 
somehow used to determine who is disabled and have shaped the language 
and the behaviours that are acceptable. First, the medical model considers 
disability as an individual medical condition, which requires medical inter-
vention. In this model, there is a need to separate people with disabilities 
from peers with no disabilities. The condition comes before the whole person. 
In the 70 s and 80 s century, in the UK, a disability rights movement led by 
people with disabilities, started to contest the medical model and stated 
that people are disabled by society. It is the constraints to access the world 
that exclude them from daily tasks. Political and social changes are claimed 
by people with disabilities. The social model has been widely recognised as 
a key conceptual tool in the rights of people with disabilities (Union of 
Physically Impaired against Segregation – UPIAS, 1976). At last, there is also 
the biopsychosocial model, where disability is regarded as an outcome of 
the interaction of impairment, activity limitations, and participation restric-
tions in a certain environment (Balakrishnan et  al. 2019; World Health 
Organization and World Bank 2011). Although according to the Research 
Centre for Museums and Galleries (RCMG, 2019), the medical model is dom-
inant in all areas of public life, it is important to consider that people with 
disabilities may also experience constraints towards co-creation in museums, 
due to their condition, but also because the society and the environment 
are not appropriately adapted to satisfy their requirements.
Visually impaired encompasses blind people and people with low vision. 
This group presents reduced performance in tasks requiring orientation 
and has difficulties in understanding visual information (World Health 
Organization 2019). Compared to people with sight, people with visual 
impairments require better knowledge of a space to develop a cognitive 
map, which helps them to have a more positive experience (Blades, 
Spencer, and Ungar 1999). Individual requirements can differ depending 
upon the type and degree of impairment (Goss et al. 2015; Poria, Reichel, 
and Brandt 2009; Salmen 1998), as well as the level of dependency. Also, 
those who are born with an impairment and those who acquire one may 
have different perspectives about barriers (Shakespeare 2018). The first 
have no life references without impairments, whereas those with acquired 

6
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
disabilities experience them differently, according to the age when they 
were affected (Shakespeare 2018).
Visit context antecedents
Prior experience is an important antecedent of behaviour in this context 
(Bagozzi 1981; Falk and Dierking 2016; Lehto, O’Leary, and Morrison 2004). 
Prior experience (Falk and Dierking 2016), including frequent visits to muse-
ums (Carù and Cova 2015), and knowledge of existing activities at the 
museum (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018), may help visitors in the 
decision-making process for their visit and thus in the co-creation process 
of their experience in museums. This gives the visitor the necessary back-
ground knowledge to participate and interact with activities more easily 
(Falk and Dierking 2016). According to Mirghadr et al. (2018), repeat visitors 
to the same museum know what to expect and how to locate it and which 
parts and activities of the museum they most enjoy.
Another important variable is the visit group, i.e. the museum travel 
companion. Although it is important for museums to provide information 
so that people with disabilities can visit the museum independently, many 
people still visit museums with a companion, due to the lack of accessible 
information (Cock et al. 2018). Depending on their level of dependence 
(none, mild, moderate, severe and profound), this group may travel alone 
or need to travel in the company of friends, a family member or an assistant 
(Packer, Mckercher, and Yau 2007; Shakespeare 2018). Several authors focus 
on the importance of interactions with other group members who are in 
the museum, such as other visitors or staff (Bitgood 2010; Debenedetti 2003; 
Patel et  al. 2016; vom Lehn 2010). For people with disabilities, the support 
of others plays an important role, assisting the decision-making process and 
helping them overcoming some structural barriers (Argyropoulos and Kanari 
2015; Asakawa et  al. 2018; vom Lehn 2010).
Antecedents related to museums
Some authors highlight the importance of museum features which facilitate 
the visit and make it more enjoyable (Falk and Dierking 2016; Mesquita and 
Carneiro 2016). Falk and Dierking (2016) learning or interactive experience 
model identifies relevant factors affecting the museum visitor experience 
related to three overlapping contexts that influence interaction – the personal 
(already explored in section Personal antecedents), and the sociocultural and 
physical (that encompass many features of the museum) – pointing out that 
the visitor dynamically and continuously creates experiences.
Physical and sociocultural constraints impact experiences in museums, 
especially in the case of people with disabilities or even of people with 

Disability & Society
7
visual impairments (Chang 2006; Falk and Storksdieck 2005; Kempiak et  al. 
2017; López Sintas, García Álvarez, and Pérez Rubiales 2014; Mirghadr et  al. 
2018). Although discussion on the influence of some of these factors usually 
presents them as constraints and assumes they have a negative, discouraging, 
or impeditive impact, they may act in the opposite direction as facilitators 
of experience co-creation, if managed appropriately.
Due to the existing barriers, people with visual impairments feel various 
physical constraints in visiting museums since they face difficulties in way-
finding (Mesquita and Carneiro 2016; Poria, Reichel, and Brandt 2009; Rieger, 
Kessler, and Strickfaden 2022). Suggested strategies to minimise these con-
straints are the creation of 3 D models or relief maps representing the 
museum (Lancioni et al. 2010), clear signage (Goulding 2000), physical struc-
tures to help find the way (e.g. handrails, marks on the floor) (Mesquita and 
Carneiro 2016; Richards, Pritchard, and Morgan 2010; Salmen 1998) and 
navigation systems to help identify directions and objects (e.g. sound or 
digital systems), among others (Duckett and Pratt 2001).
As for the sociocultural environment, two issues emerge as especially 
important: (i) how information is provided and communicated to visitors; 
and (ii) the attitudes of museum staff towards visitors. Concerning commu-
nicational factors, people with visual impairments require reliable information 
concerning their visit and every stage of the visit requires planning time 
and attention to details. The literature suggests that, to ensure a good 
accessibility to information, museums must provide accessible websites 
(Walters 2009). With speech adjusted and updated to the audience’s needs, 
guided tours are essential (Binks, Dike, and Dagnall 1988), as are audio 
guides (Chen and Chou 2019; Cho and Jolley 2016; Hetherington 2002; 
Mesquita and Carneiro 2016), which help to interpret the exhibitions with 
a high level of description. The use of technologies and onsite interactive 
facilities, such as digital screens and 3 D games, can also help visitors engage 
with the museum exhibition (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018; Falk and 
Dierking 2016; Grandi and Gomes 2017; Mirghadr et  al. 2018). This kind of 
facilities helps to improve the accessibility of those with visual disabilities 
as well of people with other impairments or even older people.
Attitudinal factors in museums thus refer to attitudes of multiple stake-
holders with whom visitors interact during the museum visit, such as people 
within the group of visit, volunteers and other museum staff, which can 
produce different experiences (Falk and Dierking 2016; López Sintas, García 
Álvarez, and Pérez Rubiales 2014; Minkiewicz, Evans, and Bridson 2014). 
Attitudinal barriers exist on the museums’ side, often due to the lack of 
knowledge or training among staff (Black 2005). Being kind, providing clar-
ification regarding the exhibition and reliable answers are crucial attitudes 
to promote confidence and motivation (Pattison and Dierking 2013; Richards, 
Pritchard, and Morgan 2010).

8
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Barriers faced by people with disabilities or other specific groups are said 
to be either reduced through the change of attitudes toward them (Murray 
and Sproats 1990) or change of the physical environment (Darcy 2002). It 
is important for museums to involve both people with and without disabil-
ities in order to improve mutual understanding (Accentuate, & History Place 
2018). The visitors’ active participation (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018) 
will be possible if those in charge and museum staff implement actions to 
encourage visitors to participate and explore the exhibitions’ objects. These 
measures are vital to fully include visitors with visual impairments in society 
(Asakawa et  al. 2018; Devile and Kastenholz 2018; Small, Darcy, and 
Packer 2012).
According to the literature review, there is no study that focuses on a 
comprehensive set of factors that affect the way people with visual impair-
ments co-create their museum experiences and analyse the effect of these 
factors in the co-creation process. Therefore, the aim of this study is to 
advance knowledge in this field, exploring the antecedents of people with 
visual impairments co-creation in museums and their respective impact on 
experience.
Methodology
Data collection methods
The empirical study carried out was essentially exploratory and qualitative, 
and was conducted using focus groups with people with visual impairments 
who had already visited museums. It sought to give voice to people with 
visual impairments, given that they are an under-researched group in the 
fields of leisure and tourism. This approach was adopted mainly to stimulate 
exchange between participants. The focus-groups were tape recorded with 
the participants permission (oral and written) and fully transcribed. In the 
case of two participants with less than 18 years old, permission to participate 
in the study was also asked to the parents.
Before the session the participants were contacted and informed about 
the aim of the project and to ensure full understanding of the subject in 
analysis – co-creation. The words ‘participation’, ‘interaction’, ‘involvement’ 
and ‘engagement’ were used, together with some examples, to explain the 
concept. Each focus group session lasted approximately one hour, with the 
first author of the paper as moderator.
The questions asked, which were developed based on the aforementioned 
literature review, were ordered from the most general to the most specific. 
Therefore, visitors were first requested to report whether they had visited 
museums in the last three years. All the other questions were related to the 
last visit they made to a museum. Concerning the museum they visited, the 
participants were first asked about the group of people with whom they 

Disability & Society
9
made their visit. Then, focusing on experience co-creation in the museum, 
the participants were asked to describe activities and interactions with the 
physical environment of the museum (e.g. objects, games), with other people 
(e.g. group of visitors, staff) and with technical devices. To fully understand 
factors influencing co-creation, participants were explicitly requested to 
indicate the main barriers and facilitating factors experienced. The focus 
group interview ended by asking the age of the respondents. After the focus 
groups, each participant was individually contacted and requested to indicate 
his/her level of disability and to provide some information on when and 
how they acquired it. This approach was adopted to avoid constraining 
people by sharing this information in front of other participants.
Participants, recruitment and sampling
The study, carried out in Portugal, focused on people with visual impairments, 
either with low vision or blind, who visited museums. A ‘snowball’ sampling 
approach was adopted to the identification of the participants, being initially 
based on the authors personal contacts, resulting from previous work in the 
field. The selection of interviewees yielded diversity in terms of age, type 
and degree of visual impairment, as well as gender. Then, the participants 
were asked to identify other potential participants. In total, 17 persons of 
varying ages (between 15 and 65 years) with visual impairments agreed to 
share their views and museum experiences. Seven individuals were blind 
from birth, one was blind since the age of two and the remaining respon-
dents had acquired blindness later in life as a result of progressive congenital 
disease (glaucoma) or from multiple accidents. The degree of disability varied 
between 60% and 95% (Table 1).
Table 1.  Participants’ profile.
Participants
Age
Visited a museum 
in the last 3 
years
Category 
of vision
Degree of 
disability
Moment of acquisition 
of the blindness or low 
vision
Employment 
status
M1
22
Yes
Blindness
95%
Age of 2
Student
M2
22
No
Blindness
95%
Born blind
Student
M3
52
Yes
Blindness
95%
Age of 47
Employed
M4
28
Yes
Blindness
95%
Born blind
Employed
M5
65
Yes
Blindness
97%
Born blind
Student
M6
49
No
Blindness
95%
Born blind
Employed
M7
40
No
Blindness
96%
Born blind
Unemployed
M8
51
Yes
Blindness
95%
Age of 45
Employed
F1
15
Yes
Low Vision
60%
Progressively (glaucoma) Student
F2
43
No
Blindness
95%
Age of 37
Employed
F3
43
Yes
Blindness
95%
Age of 33
Unemployed
F4
39
Yes
Blindness
95%
Age of 9
Employed
F5
26
No
Blindness
96%
Born blind
Student
F6
39
No
Blindness
97%
Age of 37
Employed
F7
23
No
Blindness
80%
Age of 16
Student
F8
15
Yes
Blindness
95%
Born blind
Student
F9
25
Yes
Low Vision
65%
Progressively (glaucoma) Student
Notes: M = male, F = female.

10
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Among the participants, 10 had visited a museum in the last three years, 
while seven had visited a museum only before that. Study participants 
included both men and women, ranging from 15 to 65 years old. Eight 
participants were students, seven were employed, and two unemployed. All 
the participants were Portuguese, 7 from the north of Portugal, 6 from the 
centre, 3 from the south and 1 from Madeira, a Portuguese island located 
in the Atlantic Ocean.
Since the focus groups took place between May and July 2020, during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, and due to difficulties of setting up focus groups 
with people with visual impairments in those challenging times, five groups 
were carried out, via Zoom.
Data analysis methods
The focus group discussions, recorded with the due consent via Zoom, were 
fully transcribed. This process is essential as it gives a more precise record 
of the participants’ testimonials (Veal 2018). Data were analysed using con-
tent analysis, identifying major themes in the discourses. The process 
involves 4 phases (i) the organization of the material and definition of 
procedures; (ii) the identification of major thematical categories, (iii) the 
codification of the pieces of discourses according to the thematical cate-
gories identified and (iv) treatment of the results. Most of the categories 
used in the codification process was identified based on the literature review 
previously presented in this paper, while a few others emerged from the 
discourse of the participants of the focus groups. Two main topics were 
explored in this analysis: (i) the kind of co-creation experiences that took 
place in the museums; and (ii) the antecedents of that co-creation (visitor 
antecedents and museum antecedents). To guarantee the respondents’ ano-
nymity, participants were labelled with letters corresponding to their gender 
(M = male, F = female) and with numbers (1, 2, 3…).
Findings and discussion
Co-creation in museums in the case of people with visual impairments
In the empirical study, the participants referred to several aspects which 
clearly reveal co-creation experiences, often specifically provided by the 
museums and their staff for people with disabilities. The customization 
of experiences by handling objects or replicas and participation in guided 
tours emerged as ways to co-create across the narratives of all the par-
ticipants, being reflected in different ways as the aspects most frequently 
mentioned by participants. The literature suggests that sensory experi-
ences, such as touching and handling museums objects, can facilitate the 

Disability & Society
11
access of visitors with blindness and other visual impairments when 
visiting museums (Antón et  al. 2019; Cho and Jolley 2016; Udo and Fels 
2010; vom Lehn 2010). The opportunity to handle objects or replicas were 
mentioned, for example, by F3 and F4, as described in the follow-
ing quotes:
The guide sat us around a table where some objects were presented, we could 
participate actively touching tiles and the ceramics. (F3)
As we were guided by someone who is trained to deal with people with visual impair-
ments, despite being a permanent exhibition, they let us touch some objects. (F4)
The narrative showed other ways to co-create such as the participation 
in guided tours, as one of our interviewees notes:
At the entrance there was a lady waiting for us, supposedly, to guide us because 
we had made an advance reservation. (M1)
The narratives confirm the literature review that suggests the importance 
of providing guided tours with trained staff (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 
2018; Falk and Dierking 2016; Grandi and Gomes 2017; Kempiak et al. 2017; 
Minkiewicz, Evans, and Bridson 2014):
The guided tour made all the difference. The professional was very well prepared 
concerning the specific needs of blind participants. (F9)
Also mentioned, although by less participants, were co-production 
activities and sensory activities other than tactile adapted information, 
technology support and demonstrations, as emerges in the follow-
ing quotes:
We were invited to make a souvenir to take home … with recycled papers, we 
made a frame to place a photo in. I was very proud. (M2)
We were given boxes to smell […] inside there were different flavours, cinnamon, 
cloves and saffron… (F3)
Interaction with the technology and watching demonstrations, already 
previously mentioned in the context of museums by some researchers (Antón, 
Camarero, and Garrido 2018; Chen and Chou 2019; Cho and Jolley 2016; 
Falk and Dierking 2016; Hetherington 2002; Mesquita and Carneiro 2016), 
seem to also be important to people with visual impairments, although 
these were the less stated co-creation activities. However, two of the respon-
dents assume the following:
The success of my visit was due to the audio guide. The audio description helped 
to understand the exhibition better. (F9)
A part of the exhibition was all about technologies, with videos and interactive 
games about the original use of the building (F3)

12
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Visitor antecedents of co-creation in museums
It seems that the participants’ disability, whether congenital or acquired, 
affects their perceptions, even if with a different degree of severity. For 
instance, M6 and M3 reported that:
I just don’t like to visit museums. It doesn’t mean anything to me. As I was born 
blind, I don’t have the same perception as someone who became blind later in 
life. (M6)
The organisation asked me to touch some brushes to feel how they were made… 
animal hair, feathers. It was funny because, as I am late blind, I know exactly what 
brushes look like, but I never had that sensation before. (M3)
These statements are in line with Shakespeare (2018), who argues that a 
person who is born blind does not have the same perception of spaces and 
objects as someone who becomes blind later.
Those who visit museums regularly are more comfortable dealing with 
constraints. As stated previously, prior experience may help visitors in the 
co-creation process in museums. With time, people get familiar with the 
attraction (Mitchell and Dacin 1996; Moore and Lehmann 1980; Taheri, Jafari, 
and O’Gorman 2014; Park and Lessig 1981) and acquire new skills and moti-
vations. This idea was also mentioned by two born blind participants (F8 
and F6) who are accustomed to travelling.
I really like, after the championship, […] to visit the destination and museums. It 
is an important part of my travel to relax after the challenge. I feel fulfilled and 
happy. (F8)
I’ve been visiting museums for a few years […] Each museum I visit is a new 
experience. Visiting museums has become normal for me. The more I visit, the 
more confident I get (F6)
Concerning the group of people with whom the participants visited the 
museum, the situations vary widely. As expressed by several participants, 
for people with visual impairments, the support of family and others plays 
a vital role during a visit, helping them overcome constraints and feel more 
confident, corroborating what had already been argued by Mesquita and 
Carneiro (2016), Poria, Reichel, and Brandt (2009) and vom Lehn (2010). For 
example, M2 stated:
For me, it is difficult to visit a museum alone. I cannot do it by myself. I must be 
accompanied by someone who knows me well, and who can help me deal with the 
barriers I find all the time. I don’t have a lot of autonomy, especially in unknown 
spaces. Usually, I visit museums with my family; my mum knows me quite well, 
and she knows how to explain the space and the objects to me. (M2)
Friends and relatives, composing the group who visits the museum with 
people with visual impairments, can, however, have another important role, 
instilling a taste for museum visits, as happens with F6:

Disability & Society
13
I never thought I could come to appreciate painting […] I thought it was impos-
sible for someone like me. With this friend of mine, who works in accessibilities, 
I learned to like painting. (F6)
Museum antecedents in co-creation
Various factors that influenced co-creation related to museums can be found 
in the participants’ discourses. Those most often mentioned are associated 
with the communicational environment and the attitudinal factors, which 
highlights the relevance of those aspects, with the physical environment 
also being important.
Concerning the physical factors present in the museums, four sub-themes 
emerged as more important across the participants’ narrative: (i) the logical 
organisation of the venue (e.g. reception at the entrance); (ii) the existence 
of physical guidance to help identify pathways (e.g. handrails, labelling); (iii) 
the existence of a floor without steps or accentuated unevenness; and (iv) 
other physical barriers like the existence of narrow corridors. The solutions 
provided in the architectural context for people with physical disabilities are 
not so relevant for people with visual impairments. However, they need 
some alternative means to have meaningful experiences through other senses 
(Figueiredo, Eusébio, and Kastenholz 2012; McKercher and Darcy 2018).
The importance of the logical organisation of the venue (e.g. reception 
at the entrance) is reinforced by the following testimony:
What I felt most difficult was orientation and the organisation of the visit. I found 
the museum confusing. I felt disoriented, but this is normal. However, I tried to 
follow all the indications attentively. (F3)
Difficulties of orientation were referred to by some participants, namely 
concerning the way the space is organised and the importance of having 
physical guidance to help identify pathways (e.g. handrails, labelling). It is 
important to notice that there are specific areas in which people with visual 
impairments need assistance, one of which is orientation/mobility (Lancioni 
et al, 2019), as observed in the following discourses:
There are some strategies that allow us to be more autonomous. For example, 
there was nothing to mark the way; there was no tactile path. I never found a 
tactile path in any of the museums I visited, but I know there are some museums 
that have this solution. It would be a good investment. It is important for me to 
try to be as autonomous as I can, but it is not easy. (M1)
There are many physical barriers, but with goodwill, everything is easier, and I think 
that, even with all the constraints, it ends up being well prepared. For us, stairs 
are not a big obstacle as long as they have a handrail to help. (F4)
The importance of having a floor without steps, accentuated unevenness 
and physical barriers, was mentioned by more than half of participants. As 

14
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
mentioned by some participants, handrail in stairs to help identify pathways, 
can be a strategy to improve accessibility. This supports some previous lit-
erature (Mesquita and Carneiro 2016; Richards, Pritchard, and Morgan 2010). 
Sometimes, when museums are located inside historical buildings, it is even 
more difficult to have good physical accessibilities (Goodall et al. 2004; 
Naniopoulos et al. 2015), as interventions to improve accessibility must be 
made with care to not change the character of the spaces, as evidenced in 
some discourses:
I found many physical barriers during my last visit. For example, in the first access 
to the museum, as it was located inside a historic listed building, there were many 
steps, and there was no other option to get inside the building. Inside, an elevator 
had been installed, the building had four floors, but the access was made by stairs, 
and the garden behind was very rough, with rudimentary steps and pathway. (F6)
I knew I was going to visit an ancient monument, so I was not expecting to find 
good accessibility. I understand […] These historical sites date from a period when 
access for people with disabilities was not a consideration. (M8)
Regarding communicational factors, according to the opinions of the 
focus group participants, there is a lack of interpretation tools that would 
help minimise the constraints experienced by people with visual impair-
ments. During the visit to museums, a lot of communicational barriers were 
experienced by them. However, all the participants who visited museums 
in the last three years mentioned the existence of some tools that helped 
to minimise their constraints. The most frequently mentioned features were 
the provision of information in Braille, the existence of relief figures and 
replicas, and the provision of electronic devices for obtaining further infor-
mation. The importance of providing information in different formats like 
Braille, audio, relief figures or models was emphasised by various 
participants.
There were no explanations for people like us, museums should provide infor-
mation in different formats, but no… neither Braille, nor enlarged characters, nor 
sound. (M4)
At the entrance, I was asked if I could read Braille; as I replied yes, he immediately 
handed me a Braille leaflet that helped me understand the visit better. I read the 
leaflet attentively to understand better what I was going to see. (F9)
The museum made a relief adaptation of a Bosch triptych, and I participated as a 
tester for the relief painting (F4)
The museum is divided essentially into two main sections. One of the sections has 
all new equipment and devices. It is very interesting! We have sound which helps 
us to have a better experience. (F3)
All the participants who had visited museums in the last three years stated 
that they were allowed to touch objects in the museums they visited. This 

Disability & Society
15
confirms the relevance of tactile sensations for people with visual impair-
ments, but, at the same time, the discourses revealed the visitors’ under-
standing that some objects cannot be touched or handled due to preservation 
issues, as argued in the literature (Mesquita and Carneiro 2016). In this 
context, F4 reported the following:
As it was a visit with someone who is used to guide people with visual impairments, 
they let us touch some of the objects presented in the exhibition. Concerning some 
other objects, we were not allowed to due to preservation issues. We understand 
that! (F4)
Participants described a unique touching experience, when visiting an 
exhibition. This may corroborate the fact that visitors who experience tactile 
sensations tend to feel much more immersed in the visit, as suggested by 
Antón, Camarero, and Garrido (2018) and reported by some participants:
We were allowed to touch some traditional tiles in relief, they were original, from 
the XIX century. Due to the resistance of the material, we were able to touch 
them. (F3)
Among the participants, only one (F9) stated that she was provided with 
information in Braille and had access to an audio guide:
In this visit, the audio description was really good. I felt very confident, and I was 
able to discuss with other people. Another important aspect is that, with the help 
of the audio guide, I was able to choose my own way inside the museum. (F9)
A few participants referred to the importance of workshops to stimulate 
engagement and the learning process. The relevance of workshops for groups 
with visual disabilities has already been pointed out by Asakawa et al. (2018). 
This mean of interpretation allowed visitors to participate actively and inter-
act with the objects, giving them a feeling of well-being, as can be seen in 
the experience shared by one of the participants.
I dipped the mould in the water where the dough was, and I made a sheet of 
paper. I never thought I would ever be able to do that (…) I was very proud of 
myself. (M2)
We had a small demonstration of how matches are made. It was interesting. I like 
to do practical things; I don’t like just hearing information. (M3)
Of all the participants, only one (F3) reported having experienced multi-
sensorial stimuli, but this experience was extremely valued:
During this activity, we were allowed to smell and taste different spices related 
to the discoveries… cinnamon, cloves, saffron, among others. I was amazed! We 
touched, we smelt, we had a great experience (F3)
Some participants also mentioned that museum websites were not ade-
quately designed for people with visual impairments.

16
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
It is not easy to find accessible websites. Web designers are more concerned with 
the aesthetic side than with the accessible side of the website. For example, they 
put up many pictures, which does not help people with low vision or blindness (F8)
Finally, discourse analysis confirms the relevance of attitudinal factors for 
people with visual impairments (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018; Chen 
and Rahman 2018; Poria, Reichel, and Brandt 2009; Richards, Pritchard, and 
Morgan 2010). Some attitudes which facilitated co-creation were referred to, 
alongside many others which constrained this process. A positive attitude 
(e.g. being kind) was sometimes referred to as a facilitator of co-creation, 
and when this same attitude was not present (i.e. when people were not 
kind) a constraint was recognised.
The guide was very patient and always asked me if everything was ok and if I 
understood the explanations. (F9)
The lack of training and awareness of how to deal with people with visual 
impairments was a constant discussion. This confirms the literature review, 
when it reports that more than focusing on the physical condition, it is 
important to consider teaching practical skills and promoting knowledge 
about people with disabilities in general, and specifically about people with 
visual impairments. Most staff are not prepared to deal with people with 
visual impairments, as mentioned by some participants. The complexity of 
sight loss and the way it affects people’s daily lives leads to the need for 
specific strategies to deal with this public (Richards, Pritchard, and Morgan 
2010), but, according to most participants, people in general and museum 
staff are not aware of them. This was noted in some discourses, such as 
that of M4:
During one of my visits the guide’s speech wasn’t very accessible. He didn’t know 
we were blind. When we told him, he reframed his speech and he succeeded. 
Another time in another museum the guide had a PhD in accessibility (M4)
A small set of individuals talked about the importance of having people 
in museums who encourage people with visual impairments to explore 
objects. Statements not only corroborate the relevance of encouraging the 
people with visual impairments to participate in activities and explore the 
objects of the exhibition, but also stress the importance of providing addi-
tional and appropriate information and support to people with visual impair-
ments, corroborating previous literature (Antón, Camarero, and Garrido 2018; 
Richards, Pritchard, and Morgan 2010):
Most of the time, there is no one to accompany us during the visit and to 
encourage us to touch the objects when possible. Thankfully, I was with my 
mum, who showed me the objects I could touch and described the rest of the 
exhibition. […] I could force myself to go, but the fear is huge. I will never 
manage to do it. (M1)

Disability & Society
17
The absence of trained staff or guides thus has severe potentially negative 
impacts for people with visual impairments’s access to museums. When the 
staff had an inclusive approach, goodwill and kindness, everything became 
easier, and participants recognized the effort made by the museum’s staff.
Figure 1 summarises the factors which influence co-creation of people 
with visual impairments’s experiences in museums which emerged from the 
focus groups and that should be considered by museum managers and 
curators to design and implement appealing and meaningful experiences 
for people with visual impairments.
Conclusions and implications
The present research allows an in-depth understanding of how people with 
visual impairments co-create experiences in museums. The predominant ways 
of co-creating reported were the opportunity to handle objects or replicas 
and the participation in guided tours during the visit. Additionally, less 
mentioned by the participants were other aspects like the ability to partic-
ipate in sensory activities other than tactile, the possibility to read informa-
tion in different formats, the use of electronic devices and interactive panels, 
the use of audio guides and participation in workshops.
The present study also enabled a wide plethora of factors to be identified 
that stimulate and prevent co-creation in museums to people with visual 
impairments. These factors, also designated as antecedents, can work as 
facilitators or constraints of co-creation. These factors encompass individual 
Figure 1.  Factors influencing co-creation of the museum experience for people with visual 
impairments.

18
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
characteristics of the museum visitors, such as their level of disability, fea-
tures related to the museum visit, such as the persons who accompany 
them, as well as factors related to the physical, communicational, and atti-
tudinal environments of museums.
Moreover, the research carried out also enabled an understanding of the 
way individual antecedents can help or hinder co-creation. The study shows 
that prior experiences and the visit group have a significant influence con-
cerning co-creation. Findings highlight, for example, the importance of family, 
museum staff and schools in the decision to visit these cultural spaces and 
in the success of the visit. Furthermore, it was concluded that those who 
are used to visiting museums since an early age do it regularly and have 
positive experiences, minimising the constraints they can experience. On the 
other hand, it is important to understand that there are differences in the 
visiting habits of those born blind and those who are late blind. Those who 
were born blind do not feel as confident in visiting museums and in 
co-creating experiences.
The present research also provides important conclusions on the impact 
of museum features, namely physical, communicational, and attitudinal fac-
tors, on the co-creation of the museum experience in the case of people 
with visual impairments. The research suggests that the communicational 
and attitudinal factors are considered the most negative when not correctly 
addressed by museums. In this context, this study emphasises the lack of 
training among museum staff regarding people with visual impairments, as 
mentioned in the literature, and highlights its high negative potential 
impacts. Also, kindness and sensitivity of staff were pointed out as crucial 
aspects in promoting a more in-depth exploration of museums by people 
with visual impairments, encouraging a higher engagement with activities 
and objects. Regarding communicational factors, the research clearly remarks 
the relevance of an approach based on multiple formats of the information 
provided. Although the physical environmental factors seem less influential 
than the communicational and attitudinal factors in experiencing co-creation, 
the findings highlight certain aspects of this environment that must not be 
disregarded.
The study carried out also has important implications for those who 
manage museums and provides guidelines to improve the co-creation of 
the museum experience of people with visual impairments. First, it points 
out the relevance of providing training for museum staff regarding the needs 
of people with visual impairments and on how to deal with these people, 
to promote more inclusive tourism and cultural enjoyment. The study also 
stresses some aspects to be taken care in museums to minimise constraints 
experienced by people with visual impairments such as improving the com-
municational strategies using varied information formats – including Braille, 
audio information, relief figures, the opportunity to touch replicas – and 

Disability & Society
19
multiple interpretation techniques. Offering guided tours customised to this 
public and the opportunity to participate in multisensory experiences emerge 
as particularly important. This offer would be critical to satisfy the desire 
evidenced by those with visual disabilities to be (more) autonomous and to 
participate in co-creation of experiences when visiting these cultural spaces. 
Regarding physical features, it is imperative to ensure a logical organisation 
of the space and the provision of guidance facilities due to the high level 
of difficulties experienced with wayfinding, as well as to reducing the physical 
barriers faced by people with visual impairments.
Despites its relevant contributions, the present study has some limita-
tions and opens new opportunities for future research. It is restricted to 
Portugal and to people with visual impairments. Therefore, this research 
can be improved if extended to other geographical contexts and if other 
groups of people with disabilities are considered. In addition, quantitative 
studies can be carried out to measure the impact of these factors in the 
co-creation in museums and consequent satisfaction of people with visual 
impairments and other kinds of people with disabilities. Finally, we hope 
to have contributed to more inclusive museums and highlighted the impor-
tance of designing specific strategies to improve the museum experience 
for people with visual impairments, a market segment for whom the mul-
tisensorial, educational, and participative aspects are particularly valued 
and rewarding.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
ORCID
Susana Mesquita 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2415-3960
Ana Caldeira 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5712-0324
Maria João Carneiro 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1682-6857
References
Accentuate, and History Place. 2018. Engaging deaf and disabled young people with 
heritage. Accentuate, and History Place. Folkestone. http://historyof.place/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/HOP_TK_Design_YoungPeople__Final_PRINT.pdf.
Antón, Carmen, Carmen Camarero, and María-José Garrido. 2018. “Exploring the Experience 
Value of Museum Visitors as a Co-Creation Process.” Current Issues in Tourism 21 (12): 
1406–1425. doi:10.1080/13683500.2017.1373753.
Antón, Carmen, Carmen Camarero, Marta Laguna, and Dimitros Buhalis. 2019. “Impacts 
of Authenticity, Degree of Adaptation and Cultural Contrast on Travellers’ Memorable 
Gastronomy Experiences.” Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management 8623: 1–22.

20
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Argyropoulos, Vassilios S., and Charikleia Kanari. 2015. “Re-Imagining the Museum through 
‘Touch’: Reflections of Individuals with Visual Disability on Their Experience of 
Museum-Visiting in Greece.” Alter,European Journal of Disability Research 9 (2): 130–143. 
doi:10.1016/j.alter.2014.12.005.
Asakawa, S., J. Guerreiro, D. Ahmetovic, K. M. Kitani, and C. Asakawa. 2018. “The 
Present and Future of Museum Accessibility for People with Visual Impairments.” 
Proceedings of the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers 
and Accessibility, 382–84. Galway: Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. 
doi:10.1145/3234695.3240997.
Bagozzi, R. P. 1981. “Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior: A Test of Some Key Hypotheses.” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 41 (4): 607–627. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.41.4.607.
Balakrishnan, Abhilash, Karishma Kulkarni, Sydney Moirangthem, Channaveerachari Naveen 
Kumar, Suresh Bada Math, and Pratima Murthy. 2019. “The Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act 2016: Mental Health Implications.” Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine 
41 (2): 119–125. doi:10.4103/IJPSYM.IJPSYM_364_18.
Binkhorst, E. 2006. “The Co-Creation Tourism Experience.” In XV International Tourism and 
Leisure Symposium Barcelona, 1–13. Barcelona: Universitat Ramon Llull. ESADE.
Binks, G., J. Dike, and P. Dagnall. 1988. Visitors Welcome: A Manual on the Presentation and 
Interpretation of Archaeological Excavations. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office for 
English Heritage.
Bitgood, S. 2010. “An Attention-Value Model of Museum Visitors.” Visitor Attention: 1–27. 
http://caise.insci.org/uploads/docs/VSA_Bitgood.pdf.
Black, Graham. 2005. The Engaging Museum: Developing Museums for Visitor Involvement. 
UK: Routledge.
Black, G. 2012. Transforming museums in the twenty first century (1st ed.). London and 
Newyork: Routledge.
Blades, M., C. Spencer, and S. Ungar. 1999. “Map Use by Adults with Visual Impairments.” 
The Professional Geographer 51 (4): 539–553. doi:10.1111/0033-0124.00191.
Blume-Kohout, M. E., S. R. Leonard, and J. L. Novak-Leonard. 2015. “When Going Gets 
Tough: Barriers and Motivations Affecting Arts Attendance.” Arts Attendance in the Nation: 
Barriers, Motivations, and Survey of Arts Participation. Washington, DC: NEA Office of 
Research & Analysis. https://www.arts.gov/impact/research/publications/when-goin
g-gets-tough-barriers-and-motivations-affecting-arts-attendance.
Buhalis, D., and S. Darcy. 2011. Accessible Tourism: Concepts and Issues. Accessible Tourism: 
Concepts and Issues. Bristol: Channel View Publications. doi:10.1080/21568316.2011.60
3886.
Cachia, A. 2013. “Disabling’ the Museum: Curator as Infrastructural Activist.” Journal of 
Visual Art Practice 12 (3): 257–289. doi:10.1386/jvap.12.3.257_1.
Carù, Antonella, and Bernard Cova. 2015. “‘Co-Creating the Collective Service Experience’. 
Edited by Dr Elina Jaakkola, Anu Helkkula and Dr Leena Aarikka-Stenroos.” Journal of 
Service Management 26 (2): 276–294. doi:10.1108/JOSM-07-2014-0170.
Chang, E. 2006. “Interactive Experiences and Contextual Learning in Museums.” Studies in 
Art Education 47 (2): 170–186. doi:10.1080/00393541.2006.11650492.
Chen, Ching Fu, and Shih Huan Chou. 2019. “Antecedents and Consequences of Perceived 
Coolness for Generation Y in the Context of Creative Tourism - A Case Study of the 
Pier 2 Art Center in Taiwan.” Tourism Management 72 (June): 121–129. doi:10.1016/j.
tourman.2018.11.016.
Chen, Han, and Imran Rahman. 2018. “Cultural Tourism: An Analysis of Engagement, 
Cultural Contact, Memorable Tourism Experience and Destination Loyalty.” Tourism 
Management Perspectives 26 (April): 153–163. doi:10.1016/j.tmp.2017.10.006.

Disability & Society
21
Cho, H., and A. Jolley. 2016. “Museum Education for Children with Disabilities: Development 
of the Nature Senses Traveling Trunk.” Journal of Museum Education 41 (3): 220–229. 
doi:10.1080/10598650.2016.1193313.
Cock, M., M. Bretton, A. Fineman, R. France, C. Madge, and M. Sharpe. 2018. State of 
museum access 2018. Vocaleyes and Stagetext. https://vocaleyes.co.uk/state-of- 
museum-access-2018.
Crawford, D. W., and G. Godbey. 1987. “Reconceptualizing Barriers to Family Leisure.” 
Leisure Sciences 9 (2): 119–127. doi:10.1080/01490408709512151.
Darcy, S. 2002. “Marginalized Participation: Physical Disability, High Support Needs and 
Tourism.” Journal of Hospitality Management 9 (1): 61–72.
Debenedetti, S. 2003. “Investigating the Role of Companions in the Art Museum Experience.” 
International Journal of Arts Management 5 (3): 52–63.
Devile, E., and E. Kastenholz. 2018. “Accessible Tourism Experiences: The Voice of People 
with Visual Disabilities.” Journal of Policy Research in Tourism, Leisure and Events 10 (3): 
265–285. doi:10.1080/19407963.2018.1470183.
Duckett, P. S., and R. Pratt. 2001. “The Researched Opinions on Research: Visually Impaired 
People and Visual Impairment Research.” Disability & Society 16 (6): 815–835. 
doi:10.1080/09687590120083976.
Falk, J., and L. Dierking. 2016. The Museum Experience Revisited. The Museum Experience 
Revisited. New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315417851.
Falk, J., and M. Storksdieck. 2005. “Using the Contextual Model of Learning to Understand 
Visitor Learning from a Science Center Exhibition.” Science Education 89 (5): 744–778. 
doi:10.1002/sce.20078.
Figueiredo, E., C. Eusébio, and E. Kastenholz. 2012. “How Diverse Are Tourists with 
Disabilities? A Pilot Study on Accessible Leisure Tourism Experiences in Portugal.” 
International Journal of Tourism Research 14 (6): 531–550. doi:10.1002/jtr.1913.
Frow, P., and A. Payne. 2011. “A stakeholder perspective of the value proposition concept.” 
European Journal of Marketing 45 (1): 223–240. doi:10.1108/03090561111095676
Goodall, B., G. Pottinger, T. Dixon, and H. Russell. 2004. “Heritage Property, Tourism and 
the UK Disability Discrimination Act.” Property Management 22 (5): 345–357. 
doi:10.1108/02637470410570734.
Goss, Juli, Elizabeth Kunz Kollmann, Christine Reich, and Stephanie Iacovelli. 2015. 
“Understanding the Multilingualism and Communication of Museum Visitors Who Are 
d/Deaf or Hard of Hearing.” Museums & Social Issues 10 (1): 52–65. doi:10.1179/15596
89314Z.00000000032.
Goulding, C. 2000. “The Museum Environment and the Visitor Experience.” European Journal 
of Marketing 34 (3/4): 261–278. http://www.mcbup.com/research_registers/mkt.asp. 
doi:10.1108/03090560010311849.
Grandi, S. C., and L. C. Gomes. 2017. “Experiência de Visitantes Com Deficiência Visual 
Na Sala de Física Do Museu de Ciências Da Universidade Estadual de Maringá.” Revista 
Brasileira de Educação Especial 23 (3): 423–428. doi:10.1590/s1413-653823170003 
00008.
Hetherington, K. 2002. “The Unsightly Touching the Parthenon Frieze.” Theory, Culture & 
Society 19 (5–6): 187–205. doi:10.1177/026327602761899219.
Hetherington, K. 2015. “Accountability and Disposal: Visual Impairment and the Museum.” 
Museum and Society 1 (2): 104–115. doi:10.29311/mas.v1i2.18.
Hillis, C. 2005. “Talking Images: Museums, Galleries and Heritage Sites.” International 
Congress Series 1282 (September): 855–859. doi:10.1016/j.ics.2005.05.195.
Jun, J., G. Kyle, and J. O’Leary. 2011. “Constraints to Art Museum Attendance.” Journal of 
Park & Recreation Administration 26 (1): 40–61.

22
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Jun, S., and H. K. Lee. 2014. “Dialogue and Carnival: Understanding Visitors’ Engagement 
in Design Museums.” Digital Creativity 25 (3): 247–254. doi:10.1080/14626268.2014.904
369.
Kempiak, Joanna, Lynsey Hollywood, Peter Bolan, and Una McMahon-Beattie. 2017. “The 
Heritage Tourist: An Understanding of the Visitor Experience at Heritage Attractions.” 
International Journal of Heritage Studies 23 (4): 375–392. doi:10.1080/13527258.2016.1
277776.
Kotler, N., and P. Kotler. 2000. “Can Museums Be All Things to All People?: Missions, Goals, 
and Marketing’s Role.” Museum Management and Curatorship 18 (3): 271–287. 
doi:10.1080/09647770000301803.
Lancioni, Giulio E., Nirbhay N. Singh, Mark F. O’Reilly, Gloria Alberti, Valeria Chiariello, 
Caterina Campanella, Giovanna Grillo, and Vincenzo Tagliente. 2019. “A Program Based 
on Common Technology to Support Communication Exchanges and Leisure in People 
with Intellectual and Other Disabilities.” Behavior Modification 43 (6): 879–897. 
doi:10.1177/0145445519850747.
Lancioni, Giulio E., Nirbhay N. Singh, Mark F. O’Reilly, Jeff Sigafoos, Francesca Campodonico, 
and Doretta Oliva. 2010. “Two Persons with Multiple Disabilities Use Orientation 
Technology with Auditory Cues to Manage Simple Indoor Traveling.” Research in 
Developmental Disabilities 31 (2): 397–402. doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2009.10.002.
Lee, H. M., and Stephen L. J. Smith. 2015. “A Visitor Experience Scale: Historic Sites and 
Museums.” Journal of China Tourism Research 11 (3): 255–277. doi:10.1080/19388160.2
015.1083499.
Lehn, Dirk vom. 2010. “Discovering ‘Experience-Ables’: Socially Including Visually Impaired 
People in Art Museums.” Journal of Marketing Management 26 (7–8): 749–769. 
doi:10.1080/02672571003780155.
Lehto, Xinran, Wenying Luo, Li Miao, and Richard F. Ghiselli. 2018. “Shared Tourism 
Experience of Individuals with Disabilities and Their Caregivers.” Journal of Destination 
Marketing & Management 8: 185–193. doi:10.1016/j.jdmm.2017.04.001.
Lehto, Xinran, Joseph T. O’Leary, and Alastair M. Morrison. 2004. “The Effect of Prior 
Experience on Vacation Behavior.” Annals of Tourism Research 31 (4): 801–818. 
doi:10.1016/j.annals.2004.02.006.
Lewin, K. 1946. “Action Research and Minority Problems.” Journal of Social Issues 2 (4): 
34–46. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1946.tb02295.x.
Li, Xiang (Robert), and James F. Petrick. 2008. “Tourism Marketing in an Era of Paradigm 
Shift.” Journal of Travel Research 46 (3): 235–244. doi:10.1177/0047287507303976.
López Sintas, Jordi, Ercilia García Álvarez, and Elena Pérez Rubiales. 2014. “Art Museum 
Visitors: Interaction Strategies for Sharing Experiences.” Museum Management and 
Curatorship 29 (3): 241–259. doi:10.1080/09647775.2014.919175.
Luckerhoff, J., R. G. Perreault, R. Garon, M. C. Lapointe, and V. Nguyên-Duy. 2008. “Visiting 
Art Museums: Adding Values and Constraints to Socio-Economic Status.” Loisir et Société 
/ Society and Leisure 31 (1): 69–85. doi:10.1080/07053436.2008.10707770.
McKercher, B., and S. Darcy. 2018. “Re-Conceptualizing Barriers to Travel by People with 
Disabilities.” Tourism Management Perspectives 26: 59–66. doi:10.1016/j.tmp.2018.01.003.
Mehmetoglu, Mehmet, and Marit Engen. 2011. “Pine and Gilmore’s Concept of 
Experience Economy and Its Dimensions: An Empirical Examination in Tourism.” 
Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality & Tourism 12 (4): 237–255. doi:10.1080/1
528008X.2011.541847.
Mesquita, S., and M. J. Carneiro. 2016. “Accessibility of European Museums to Visitors with 
Visual Impairments.” Disability & Society 31 (3): 373–388. doi:10.1080/09687599.2016.1
167671.

Disability & Society
23
Minkiewicz, Joanna, Jody Evans, and Kerrie Bridson. 2014. “How Do Consumers Co-Create 
Their Experiences? An Exploration in the Heritage Sector.” Journal of Marketing 
Management 30 (1–2): 30–59. doi:10.1080/0267257X.2013.800899.
Mirghadr, Leila, Neda Torabi Farsani, Zahed Shafiei, and Marzieh Hekmat. 2018. 
“Identification of Key Components of Visitor Education in a Museum.” Museum 
Management and Curatorship 33 (3): 223–234. doi:10.1080/09647775.2018.1466192.
Mitchell, A., and P. Dacin. 1996. “The Assessment of Alternative Measures of Consumer 
Expertise.” Journal of Consumer Research 23 (3): 219–239. doi:10.1086/209479.
Mohammadi, Fatemeh, Hamid Reza Yazdani, Mona Jami Pour, and Morteza Soltani. 2021. 
“Co-Creation in Tourism: A Systematic Mapping Study.” Tourism Review 76 (2): 305–343. 
doi:10.1108/TR-10-2019-0425.
Moore, W. L., and D. R. Lehmann. 1980. “Individual Differences in Search Behavior for a 
Nondurable.” Journal of Consumer Research 7 (3): 296–307. doi:10.1086/208817.
Mullens, F., and I. Glorieux. 2019. “No Interest, No Time! Gendered Constraints to Museum 
Visits in Flanders.” Loisir et Société/Society and Leisure 42 (2): 244–265. doi:10.1080/070
53436.2019.1626036.
Murray, M., and J. Sproats. 1990. “The Disabled Traveller: Tourism and Disability in Australia.” 
Journal of Tourism Studies 1 (1): 9–14.
Naniopoulos, A., P. Tsalis, E. Papanikolaou, A. Kalliagra, and C. Kourmpeti. 2015. “Accessibility 
Improvement Interventions Realised in Byzantine Monuments of Thessaloniki, Greece.” 
Journal of Tourism Futures 1 (3): 254–268. doi:10.1108/JTF-03-2015-0008.
Nielsen, J. 2015. “The Relevant Museum: Defining Relevance in Museological Practices.” 
Museum Management and Curatorship 30 (5): 364–378. doi:10.1080/09647775.2015.1043
330.
Packer, T. L., B. Mckercher, and M. K. Yau. 2007. “Understanding the Complex Interplay 
between Tourism, Disability and Environmental Contexts.” Disability and Rehabilitation 
29 (4): 281–292. doi:10.1080/09638280600756331.
Park, C. W., and V. P. Lessig. 1981. “Familiarity and Its Impact on Consumer Decision Biases 
and Heuristics.” Journal of Consumer Research 8 (2): 223–231. doi:10.1086/208859.
Patel, Menisha, Christian Heath, Paul Luff, Dirk Vom Lehn, and Jason Cleverly. 2016. 
“Playing with Words: Creativity and Interaction in Museums and Galleries.” Museum 
Management and Curatorship 31 (1): 69–86. doi:10.1080/09647775.2015.1102641.
Pattison, S. A., and L. D. Dierking. 2013. “Staff-Mediated Learning in Museums: A Social 
Interaction Perspective.” Visitor Studies 16 (2): 117–143. doi:10.1080/10645578.2013.76
7731.
Pera, R., N. Occhiocupo, and J. Clarke. 2016. “Motives and resources for value co-creation 
in a multi-stakeholder ecosystem: A managerial perspective.” Journal of Business Research 
69 (10): 4033–4041. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.03.047.
Poria, Y., A. Reichel, and Y. Brandt. 2009. “People with Disabilities Visit Art Museums: An 
Exploratory Study of Obstacles and Difficulties.” Journal of Heritage Tourism 4 (2): 117–
129. doi:10.1080/17438730802366508.
Prahalad, C., and V. Ramaswamy. 2004. “Co-Creation Experiences: The Next Practice in 
Value Creation.” Journal of Interactive Marketing 18 (3): 5–14. doi:10.1002/dir.20015.
Prebensen, N. K., H. Kim, and M. Uysal. 2016. “Cocreation as Moderator between the 
Experience Value and Satisfaction Relationship.” Journal of Travel Research 55 (7): 934–
945. doi:10.1177/0047287515583359.
Richards, V., A. Pritchard, and N. Morgan. 2010. “(Re)Envisioning Tourism and Visual 
Impairment.” Annals of Tourism Research 37 (4): 1097–1116. doi:10.1016/j.an-
nals.2010.04.011.

24
S. MESQUITA ET AL.
Rieger, J., C. Kessler, and M. Strickfaden. 2022. “Doing Dis/Ordered Mappings: Shapes of 
Inclusive Spaces in Museums.” Space and Culture 25 (1): 4–19. doi:10.1177/ 
1206331219850442.
Ritzer, G., and N. Jurgenson. 2010. “Production, Consumption, Prosumption: The Nature 
of Capitalism in the Age of the Digital ‘Prosumer’.” Journal of Consumer Culture 10 (1): 
13–36. doi:10.1177/1469540509354673.
de Rojas, Carmen, and Carmen Camarero. 2008. “Visitors’ Experience, Mood and Satisfaction 
in a Heritage Context: Evidence from an Interpretation Center.” Tourism Management 
29 (3): 525–537. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2007.06.004.
Salmen, J. 1998. Everyone’s Welcome  : The Americans with Disabilities Act and Museums. 
Washington, DC: The Association.
Shakespeare, T. 2018. Disability the Basics. 1st ed. London: Routledge.
Small, J., S. Darcy, and T. Packer. 2012. “The Embodied Tourist Experiences of People with 
Vision Impairment: Management Implications beyond the Visual Gaze.” Tourism 
Management 33 (4): 941–950. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2011.09.015.
Smith, R. W. 1987. “Leisure of Disable Tourists. Barriers to Participation.” Annals of Tourism 
Research 14 (3): 376–389. doi:10.1016/0160-7383(87)90109-5.
Taheri, Babak, Aliakbar Jafari, and Kevin O’Gorman. 2014. “Keeping Your Audience: 
Presenting a Visitor Engagement Scale.” Tourism Management 42 (June): 321–329. 
doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2013.12.011.
Udo, J. P., and D. I. Fels. 2010. “Enhancing the Entertainment Experience of Blind and 
Low-Vision Theatregoers through Touch Tours.” Disability & Society 25 (2): 231–240. 
doi:10.1080/09687590903537497.
Veal, A. J. 2018. Research Methods for Leisure and Tourism. 5th ed. Harlow: Pearson Education 
Limited.
Walters, D. 2009. “Approaches in Museums towards Disability in the United Kingdom and 
the United States.” Museum Management and Curatorship 24 (1): 29–46. 
doi:10.1080/09647770902731759.
Wellcome Collection, and Research Centre for Museums and Galleries. 2020. An ethical 
approach to interpreting disability and difference. https://www.google.com/search?cli-
ent=safari&rls=en&q=An+ethical+approach+to+interpreting+disability+and+differ-
ence.&ie=UTF-8oe=UTF-8.
World Health Organization. 2019. World Report on Vision. World Health Organization. 
Geneve. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/world-report-on-vision.
World Health Organization and World Bank. 2011. World Report on Disability. Geneve: 
World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/teams/noncommunicable-diseases/
sensory-functions-disability-and-rehabilitation/world-report-on-disability
View publication stats

