Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

Network Neutrality, Search Neutrality, and the Never-ending Conflict
between Efficiency and Fairness in Markets

ANDREW ODLYZKO *
School of Mathematics and Digital Technology Center, University of Minnesota

Abstract

Historical precedents suggest that the basic issues underlying the debate about network neutrality,
dealing with the balance between efficiency and fairness in markets, will never be resolved. Should
net neutrality dominate, attention would likely turn to other parts of the economy that might be
perceived as choke points for economic activities, such as Net search. Traditionally, the balance
between efficiency and fairness that was struck by policy makers depended heavily on cost
considerations. When a service was expensive to provide, fairness was deemphasized. In the current
discussion of network neutrality, this issue appears to be unduly neglected.

1

Introduction

As Yogi Berra and others are supposed to have said, “It's tough to make predictions,
especially about the future.” This definitely applies to society's reaction to technology.
History is full of mistaken predictions. As just one example, a decade ago Sergey Brin and
Larry Page (Brin and Page (1998)) claimed that
The goals of the advertising business model do not always correspond to providing quality search to
users. ... we expect that advertising funded search engines will be inherently biased towards the
advertisers and away from the needs of the consumers. ... we believe the issue of advertising causes
enough mixed incentives that it is crucial to have a competitive search engine that is transparent and
in the academic realm.

However, Messrs. Brin and Page realized their mistake, and went on to achieve fame
and wealth building Google, which (at least so far) has managed to be just what they had
predicted was impossible, an extraordinarily successful search engine that is supported by
ads, and is both proprietary and extraordinarily opaque. This is a common pattern in the
history of technology that even the inventors and promoters of an innovation have
mistaken notions of the impact it will have on society, yet often they do succeed in spite of
this. As another example of this phenomenon, in the early years of railroads, it was widely
expected that their spread would severely cut back on horse populations. Instead, railroads
* Mailing address. School of Mathematics, 117 Vincent Hall, 206 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA. E-mail: odlyzko@umn.edu Research partially supported by National Science Foundation FIND
program grant CNS-0721510. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed here
are mine, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. I thank the editors,
the anonymous referees, as well as Dave Burstein, Richard Clarke, Fernando Gil De Bernabe, Stefano
Quintarelli, and Hal Varian for their comments.
40

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

stimulated horse breeding, since rails were great for transport once one got to them, but the
“first mile” problem of reaching those rails required horses!
While detailed predictions appear impossible most of the time, there are certain
persistent trends in history. One of these trends is that some mistakes keep getting made
again and again, in spite of all the experiences of previous centuries. Telecom seems
especially prone to this tendency as is discussed below, which makes it possible to predict
that many ventures will fail (an exception to the general rule about difficulty of
prediction), but complicates planning in other ways. A related persistent trend is that
controversies can frequently be classified into certain patterns that recur over and over
again. This trend, which applies to the net neutrality debate, strongly suggests that the
basic issue involved in it is not going to disappear. The issue is how much control service
providers should have over the bits that society relies on so much.
The net neutrality issue has been pronounced dead and buried several times, but it has
bounced back, typically when a service provider said or did something that struck some
people as outrageous. Thus at the end of 2005, Ed Whitacre of SBC (now renamed
AT&T), when asked about business prospects of companies like Google, responded
(Whitacre (2005)):
How do you think they're going to get to customers? Through a broadband pipe. Cable companies
have them. We have them. Now what they would like to do is use my pipes free, but I ain't going to
let them do that because we have spent this capital and we have to have a return on it. So there's
going to have to be some mechanism for these people who use these pipes to pay for the portion
they're using. Why should they be allowed to use my pipes? The Internet can't be free in that sense,
because we and the cable companies have made an investment and for a Google or Yahoo! or
Vonage or anybody to expect to use these pipes [for] free is nuts.

This led to extensive protests and discussions that appeared to peter out after a while.
However, at the end of 2007, Comcast stirred up a new round of controversy by spoofing
packets to disrupt peer-to-peer (P2P) transmissions of its customers.
The net neutrality debate is often pictured as a contest between the two most prominent
corporate champions of the opposing sides, AT&T and Google. But the underlying issue
predates both companies by centuries. It was never resolved completely, since it arises
from a conflict between society’s drives for economic efficiency and for fairness. There is
no reason to expect that this conflict will lessen, and instead there are arguments that
suggest it will intensify. Should something like net neutrality prevail, the conflict would
likely move to a different level. That level might become search neutrality. (And
allegations about discriminatory behavior of a web search provider have surfaced recently
in China, Tschang (2009).) Or, to take another currently popular concept, if “cloud
computing” does become as significant as its enthusiasts claims, it could lead to
dominance of a single service provider. The effective monopoly of that dominant player
could then become perceived as far more insidious than any of the “walled gardens” or
“intelligent network” that telcos would like to build.
This brief note outlines some of the issues related to net neutrality, and the
controversies that might replace it. It concludes by raising a key question that appears
missing from the current net neutrality debates. It is that of a quantitative discussion of just
how much it costs to build out and run a broadband network, whether such a network can
be viable under net neutrality, and if not, how far away from net neutrality should one
expect (or allow) service providers to depart.
What is acknowledged, whether explicitly or implicitly, in most discussions of net
neutrality is that the basic issue is of price discrimination. There are frequent claims about

41

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

the need to manage network traffic, but when one gets deeper into them, one typically
finds complaints about “5% of the users generating 50% of the traffic” and the like, which
have less to do with providing adequate service, and more with a way to apportion the cost.
And the usual practices that have been observed have tended to be more about restricting
some applications than about managing congestion, say. For example, consider the
Comcast vs. BitTorrent affair that surfaced in 2007. The FCC in its order to Comcast to
end its practices, Federal Communications Commission (2008), noted that Comcast was
throttling BitTorrent traffic even when there was no congestion, while allowing heavy
users to carry out unimpeded even during peak congestion periods, as long as they were
not using BitTorrent. And Comcast changed its story several times, when its previous
explanations were found to be at variance with facts. Now it is true that this FCC decision
was by a 3 to 2 vote, and one of the opponents, Commissioner McDowell, noted in his
dissent that the evidence was “thin and conflicting”, with further complaints about lack of
signed statements and the like. So perhaps the FCC decision was wrong in its statement of
facts. But the description in Federal Communications Commission (2008) is typical of
what one finds in history. Companies engaging in discriminatory practices try to conceal it,
dissemble when caught, and cite various seemingly less objectionable objectives (safety,
performance, etc.) as the reasons for their policies. Very seldom do they come out and
admit what they are doing.
It should be emphasized that from the standard economic point of view, there is
nothing nefarious about attempting to introduce differential charging. It is just that social
acceptability of such practices is at wide variance with the recommendations of the
conventional economic models. There are many precedents for price discrimination in all
commerce, and in transportation and communication in particular. With more control,
service providers can obtain more funding, which may be used to build out networks. But
in the context of net neutrality, this issue is not discussed very extensively. And when it is,
it is treated in a curiously one-side manner, just about discriminating among content
providers, and without specifying just how much discrimination is needed. Service
providers argue that they can finance the buildout of broadband networks only by charging
extra fees to parties such as Google. But so far the main change that has taken place in the
U.S. (aside from a few providers interfering with P2P transmissions) is that in some states
telephone companies have won the right to deploy broadband only in those neighborhoods
they choose. (There are some provisions about not discriminating against the poor, but
those are vague and almost surely unenforceable. Traditionally, both cable and telephone
companies had obtained the right to string their wires in municipalities by promising to
serve every one in each area equally. But that was not always so in the early days of the
telephone industry, see Gabel (1987).) If broadband networks are horrendously expensive
to build, as is often implied, should one perhaps go further, and make the price depend on
the income of the user? That is how a Harvard education is priced, after all. There is a “list
price” of about $45,000 per year, and families with incomes up to $180,000 per year (as
announced at year-end 2007) can obtain discounts by giving up their financial privacy and
submitting detailed accounting of their income and assets. So we might price basic Internet
connectivity at $1,000 per month, with discounts for those who cannot afford that much
and are willing to reveal detailed financial information. Such a policy could also be
accompanied by additional charges for every bit that is actually transmitted, with the
charge determined by the value of that particular transaction.

42

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

Comparing Internet access to college tuition may be extreme, but it helps frame the
discussion by exhibiting the whole range of network access and pricing policies. There is a
range of net neutrality choices at one end (depending on the definition of net neutrality one
chooses) and a Harvard-like policy at the other. Which policy will be sufficient to produce
the networks that will be needed?
Contrary to many claims of opponents of net neutrality, networks are not very
expensive to build (as will be discussed later), and some simple calculations suggest that a
net neutral communications infrastructure could be viable economically. But such an
infrastructure might enable even more extreme forms of price discrimination by players
such as Google, and might then lead to new controversies and demands for new forms of
regulation.

2

The value of bits and content versus connectivity

It helps to consider how much value is attached to different types of bits. Now value is
hard to define (there is market value, different in different markets, and use value), so as a
proxy, let us consider how much users pay for various telecommunication services. We
then come up with a listing that looks something like Table 1. These are just prices paid,
and so do reflect varying costs, competition, and pricing policies in various degrees.
Service

Revenue per MB

Wireless texting

$1,000.00

Wireless voice

1.00

Wireline voice

0.10

Residential Internet

0.01

Backbone Internet

0.0001

Table 1: Value of bits: Approximate price per megabyte of various services.
The numbers in this table should not be taken as too precise. They were chosen to be
nice round numbers that are in approximately the right ranges. For example, it appears that
SMS messages might be something like 30 bytes on average, and in much of the world
they cost about $0.10 each, which results in a price of $3,000 per MB, but that is close to
the $1,000 listed. Many of these services, especially in the U.S., are sold in bundles (a
topic to be covered in much more detail below), so per-unit or per-MB pricing is not
visible to the users. But generally speaking a residential user who transmits 3 GB/month
and pays $30/month for a broadband connection (figures that seem typical for some
countries) is effectively paying about one cent per MB. Similarly, a small ISP that has to
purchase access to the backbones from larger service providers and pays $20 per Mbps per
month (which would be a high price in the U.S. as this paper is being written, but applies
in some parts of the world) on the 95-percentile basis, with a 1.5 peak-to-average traffic
ratio, is paying about one hundredths of a penny per MB. Thus all the numbers in the table
43

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

can be defended with data as approximately correct, usually within factors of two or three.
It is the great, orders of magnitude, disparities between them that are of interest.
Price per bit is just one measure of a communication service. One should also keep in
mind profits, since that is what drives investments, and total revenues. It appears that
nothing in telecom is at the profit levels of wireless texting (aside possibly from ring tone
downloads, or services such as Caller ID). This helps explain why the telcos are attracted
to “walled garden” approaches, where they hope to obtain similarly high profits from
narrowly defined services. Note also that the basic search/ad services of Google generate
very little traffic, but are extremely profitable, leading to the “Google envy” that appears to
be driving so much of current telecom planning. But in terms of revenues, an estimated 7080% of worldwide telecom revenues come from voice1, (with wireless increasingly
dominating). And the bulk of the remainder is from other connectivity services (such as
texting, or, to the extent one can allocate revenues from Internet access, from email). In
particular, this all by itself suggests that the claims of a high level AT&T manager, Wilson
(2006), that net neutrality “is about streaming movies” is mistaken. If anything, net
neutrality and the future of telecom in general, are far more about voice and the services
that will succeed voice in importance. In particular, the key issue is how to extract
payment from customers when voice, the most valuable service they receive, is a free
feature of the basic broadband connectivity they buy.
The comment that net neutrality “is about streaming movies” is a reflection of two
fundamental and very deeply ingrained false myths. One of them is that “content is king”.
This was the key motivator behind European service providers throwing away about 100
billion Euros (almost $150 billion at today’s exchange rates) on 3G spectrum auctions, and
then more on top of that for misdirected technology development and deployment. The
promise was that wireless “content” services (movies, music, location based services, and
the like) would double average monthly revenues. Yet, even a superficial look at history
would have shown the “content is king” myth to be false, Odlyzko (2000), Odlyzko
(2001a). Connectivity has always been valued far more than content. This is slowly and
painfully being rediscovered here and there. For example, in the briefing by Takeshi
Natsuno,” one of the principal architects behind DoCoMo’s wildly successful 1999 launch
of i-mode”, where “one message became abundantly clear: content is not king”, Warner
(2007). Although wireless data revenues are growing, they come overwhelmingly from
texting, a connectivity service, and that is what users care about the most, Ankeny (2008).
For another, more recent, scholarly paper that provides broad historical and statistical
support for the observation about the limited role of “content,” see Alleman and Rappoport
(2007). Still, the “content is king” myth has reigned for over two centuries, Odlyzko
(2000), Odlyzko (2001a) in spite of extensive evidence against it. And it reigns not just
among business executives and policy makers, but among scholars. The recent literature on
net neutrality, for example, relies on models of transportation networks as content delivery
mechanisms (see, for example, Economides and Tag (2007), Singer (2007), van Schewick
(2007), and many others), and it is only rarely that one hears even a brief parenthetical
mention of a dissenting voice (as in Hogendorn (2007)). So it seems a safe bet that the
“content is king” myth will guide decision making in the future. Hence, many decisions
will be made in predictably incorrect ways, in particular about regulating net neutrality or
about trying to exploit its lack.
1

ITU. 2007. Workshop on the Future of Voice. Presentations and background papers available at
http://www.itu.int/spu/voice
44

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

The other false myth embedded in the “streaming movies” quote is that movies should
be delivered in real-time streaming mode. Video is already a very large fraction of Internet
traffic. And it appears that an increasing fraction is being streamed. But there is little
reason, except for ingrained prejudices, why that should be so. With very few exceptions
(voice conversations and videoconferencing the primary ones), it is far more effective (in
terms of providing quality service, and in keeping the network manageable and
inexpensive) to transfer segments of movies or music faster than real-time for replay from
a local buffer, Odlyzko (1999), Odlyzko (2004b). But this myth is also deeply ingrained,
and seems impossible to dislodge. So it is likely to continue misleading both service
providers and policy makers. Service providers will build out expensive networks designed
for streaming video that will waste their shareholders' and their customers' money. And
policy makers will worry about how to regulate such features.
The combination of deeply embedded but false myths about communications,
combined with general inability to predict both developments in technology and society’s
reaction to technology, mean that no fixed set of rules is likely to be satisfactory, as reality
will be intruding and making the best laid plans irrelevant. But some of the issues that will
be controversial seem very easy to predict, in particular the degree of price discrimination
that service providers are allowed to practice.

3

Price discrimination precedents

The wide disparities in prices seen in Table 1 help explain the strong incentives towards
price discrimination that exist. Similar incentives have existed for ages, and they
frequently led to differential pricing, both in communications (see, for example, Odlyzko
(2001b) or the more detailed discussion in Odlyzko (2000)) and in transportation, Odlyzko
(2004a). As just one example, let us note that in 1829, the toll schedule on the Stockton
and Darlington Railway, the pioneering locomotive-powered public railway, had charges
of 0.5 (old English) pence per ton per mile for coal destined for shipment out of the region,
4 pence per ton per mile for coal for use in the region, and 6 pence per ton per mile for
general merchandise (Table 5 on p. 83 of Kirby (1993)). This is just one of myriad
examples one can cite (for others, see Jackman (1916), Odlyzko (2004a), for example). But
it does illustrate several relevant points. One is that charges were dependent not just on the
nature of the cargo, but also on its destination, so we had something similar to today’s
much disliked and feared “deep packet inspection”. (And there were attempts to conceal
nature of some shipments, with penalties imposed when detected.) Another is that such
charges were not the result of simple economic optimization, but often involved heavy
politics. In particular, the low charges for coal destined for shipment were the result of coal
mine owners in a different region trying to avoid competition from the coal mines that the
Stockton and Darlington Railway was to serve (see Kirby (1993) for details). They
persuaded Parliament to impose what they thought was an unprofitable rate that would ruin
this line. And yet another lesson (about difficulty in forecasting technology) is that this
attempt failed, since those coal mine owners did not anticipate progress in railway
development correctly, and the supposedly ruinous rate turned out to work quite well.
Finally, yet another lesson is that although the Stockton and Darlington tolls differed
substantially according to the nature of freight and whether it was destined for shipment or
for in-region use, they were otherwise uniform, not distinguishing between shippers, or

45

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

locations, being based strictly on mileage. This represented the other major factor to be
discussed later, namely that price discrimination has traditionally been disliked and feared,
and has usually been strictly limited.
In view of the historical precedents for price discrimination in communication and
transportation, some of the arguments of net neutrality proponents are questionable. For
example, Vint Cerf of Google has claimed, Mohammed (2006), that since both residential
users and companies like Google pay for access to the Internet, it would be unfair for
“access providers ... to step in the middle and create a toll road to limit customers’ ability
to get access to services of their choice”. Yet such tolls have been frequent, and have often
been used to shift costs of the entire communication system around. Note that Table 1
shows that a communication between a residential user and Google costs about 100 times
as much to the user as to Google. (The differential is likely much more than 100, since
Google may very well be getting free connections to some access providers using its own
fiber or wavelengths. Such arrangements probably cost much less than the transit fees that
were used in computing the numbers in that table.) But in the past, in the traditional voice
telephone network, business customers frequently paid far more than residential ones.
Sometimes this was voluntary (as in the provision of toll-free numbers), but most of the
time, especially high charges for businesses were imposed on them. This started out with
the very first telephone service. The private company that controlled the Bell invention
used its patent-protected monopoly to simply demand twice as much for business uses of
the telephone as for personal use (Odlyzko, 2000). This policy of charging business
customers extra continued under regulation. As a rough approximation, it appears that back
about half a century ago, business customers in the U.S. paid about two-thirds of the cost
of the telephone network, and residential users for one-third. Over the last decade, the
balance appears to have shifted, and so corporations are escaping the burden they used to
bear. (Whether that is good or not is another issue.)
Thus from a historical perspective, there is nothing novel about service providers
attempting to erect toll booths and charge extra for traffic to and from Google. The
marketplace is full of various indirect payment arrangements. In principle, it would not be
any more unusual for Google to pay access providers to allow residential customers to
connect to the whole Internet (and not just to Google) than it is for advertisers to pay
Google to provide search results to end users who in most cases do not pay anything to
those advertisers.

4

Privacy and price discrimination

The incentives for differential charging are well understood, but seldom discussed in
public. However, they are discussed in private. As one example, an antitrust lawsuit made
public an email of Aug. 21, 1997 from Warren Buffett, “the sage of Omaha”, to Jeff Raikes
of Microsoft, in which Buffett wrote that
[Alexander Graham] Bell should have anticipated Bill [Gates] and let someone else put in the phone
infrastructure while he collected by the minute and distance (and even importance of the call if he
could have figured a wait [sic] to monitor it) in perpetuity.

Alexander Graham Bell did not collect by the importance of a phone call. However, he, or
rather the company that he helped start with his patents, certainly did charge by the minute
and distance (which has traditionally correlated with value and willingness to pay, the

46

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

rationale for distance-sensitive charges in postal systems before the Penny Post Reform).
And history does record instances of telephone companies attempting to restrict usage of
hotel phones to hotel employees. There was even a telco protest against the use of a
telephone to alert the fire department to a fire on a neighbor’s property on the grounds that
the phone was for personal use only, Odlyzko (2000). So the incentives to price
discriminate have been understood for a long time, and were frequently pursued to the
extent (and often beyond that) allowed by technology and law. Technology was often a
limiting factor, as a rich man could dress in rags when showing up for a train or coach ride,
and could send a servant to buy goods at low prices. Further, rules and regulations also
often interfered with what sellers might have wanted to do.
The information and communication technologies revolution, and the Internet in
particular, are leading to unprecedented opportunities for differential charging. Buyers’
willingness to pay can be estimated from detailed knowledge of their behavior, and their
usage can be monitored and restricted, thus inhibiting resale, which has been a traditional
escape route from extreme forms of differential pricing. The thesis proposed in Odlyzko
(1996) and Odlyzko (2003a) is that the growing erosion of privacy can be explained by
companies preparing to exploit the growing opportunities for price discrimination. But
employing price discrimination is like playing with fire, as is shown by past experience.

5

Fair and efficient markets

There are strong incentives for fine-scale differential pricing, with the Holy Grail of
commerce a system in which every item or service component is priced at the buyer’s
maximal willingness to pay. But there are also several countervailing tendencies. They
include the generic benefits of bundling, which is how flat rate services can be viewed.
(One of the great ironies of the communications industry is that one segment fights against
attempts to make it unbundle cable TV channel. At the same time, most of the industry
keeps complaining that flat rates are unsustainable on the Internet and elsewhere, and
supports development and deployment of technologies such as IMS that could make finegrained charging feasible. And yet all this time flat rates are spreading!) But in addition,
there is the willingness of users to pay more for flat rates, as well as the substantial effect
that flat rates have in stimulating usage. These factors are described in detail in Fishburn et
al (1997), Levinson and Odlyzko (2008), Odlyzko (2000), and Odlyzko (2001b). They
frequently swamp the incentives towards fine-scale discriminatory pricing, in what may be
perceived as another triumph of behavioral economics over the standard economic models.
It appears likely that for relatively inexpensive goods and services that are used frequently,
flat rates or other simple pricing plans are often of benefit to sellers. This issue would not
be considered further here, except to note that these effects have been visible in
communications at least since the Penny Post Reform in Britain in 1840, and that the
telecom industry has refused to learn from them. Hence, it is safe to predict that service
provider policies as well as regulation will often be misdirected through ignorance of such
effects.
The main constraint on price discrimination comes from society’s dislike of the
practice. This dislike is reflected in customs, laws, and regulations. Society has struggled
for centuries with the conflicting incentives, one to allow differential pricing in order to
stimulate greater production, and the other the desire to limit it. For many segments of the

47

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

economy, essentially untrammelled markets were allowed to operate, subject to minor
antitrust and related constraints, and the discrimination that arose there was tolerated. But
for key communication and transportation industries that was not regarded as adequate,
and common carriage was the doctrine that was applied. Common carriage served to limit
discrimination, but, in a nod to economic incentives, did not prohibit discrimination
entirely. For example, senior citizen or student discounts were and continue to be accepted.
What was illegal were “undue or unreasonable” preferences, vague terms that provided
lifetime employment to legions of lawyers (and, in more recent times, economists). At this
moment, in the U.S., common carriage has been waived for Internet services. But it could
easily come back. And even more stringent constraints could come. The interesting
comparison is with that great revolutionary technology of the 19th century, the railroads.
They were subject to common carriage rules from the beginning. Not only that, but their
early charters had embedded in them structural separation (similar to the one that prevailed
on canals). The railroad company was expected to provide a rail road, and have carriers
use their own wagons and motive power. But this quickly broke down. In the words of a
British observer writing soon after the change took place, Lardner (1846, p.525):
... the privileges and rights contemplated, as well by the companies as by Parliament, were merely
those necessary to enable them to construct and maintain a road, which was to be open to all who
might desire to use it, on the payment of a certain toll to the company. ... A colossal monopoly,
never contemplated by Parliament, nor foreseen by the companies themselves, had come into being.

But even when vertical integration was conceded to railways, they were constrained to
charges that depended only on mileage travelled, class of service, and (for freight) nature
of good carried. Thus an enthusiastic supporter of railways, and an advocate for them in
the small package wars (described briefly in Odlyzko (2004a)) claimed in 1847,
Anonymous (1847, p.12), after a discussion of how valuable differential pricing would be
for a particular railways, that “The people of Kent will never rest satisfied with, the public
will not tolerate, the legislature would grant a remedy for the correction of a [scheme with
high per-mile fares on some routes and low fares on others].” So even though the
economic incentives pointed towards differential pricing according to route, and those
would have helped to spread the network more widely, this observer was not willing to go
that far, although he was supportive of differing charges for different classes of passenger
service and for different types of freight.
The vertical integration followed by railroads in getting into carriage of goods and
passengers was usually justified on the grounds of safety. Railroad managers complained
they could not protect life and limb unless they controlled the entire operation on their line.
And they did have evidence to support their contention, just as today’s telecom service
providers argue they need fine scale control over the packet traffic in order to prevent
malicious attacks, assure customers of decent connections, etc. But it appears that much of
the motivation for the vertical integration of railroads came from the greater profit
opportunities that railroads saw in operating that way. This is shown both by the
occasional quotes from managers, and the fact that railroads did manage to operate their
trains over the lines of other railroads with which they had friendly business relationships.
(This was an early instance of the phenomenon demonstrated to hold in telecom a century
and a half later, that in the absence of clear boundary, it is hard to regulate a complicated
system if the main operators do not wish to cooperate, Faulhaber (2003).) What ensued
was a period of intense development of railroads, and also of extensive price
discrimination that aroused strong protests. In the words of a report from a committee of

48

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

the U.S. Senate in 1874 (cited in Healy (1940, pp.382-383), what was desperately needed
was
a remedy for the evils of unjust discrimination against one locality in favor of another, or in favor of
one description of trade at the expense of another ... and of uncertainty and favoritism by means of
special contracts, rebates, drawbacks, and the thousand and one other means by which a rich and
powerful company may, by the secret adjustment of rates, impose upon the public.

The complaints were not just about level of railroad charges (which were declining quite
rapidly during the 1870s). The concern was more about the fairness of the system. A
contemporary comment on the situation was voiced in Hadley (1885):
But the fact that the charges are so low does not make differences in charge bear any less severely
upon business. A difference of five cents per bushel in the charge for transporting wheat a thousand
miles is a small matter, taken by itself. It would be weeks before it would make a difference of one
cent to the individual consumer of bread. But if a railroad makes this reduction for one miller, and
not another, it will be enough to drive the latter out of business.

The dislike of price discrimination has deep and still poorly understood roots (see Odlyzko
(2003a) for some references) at the level of individuals. Even people who receive
discounts are often suspicious as to whether they are being treated fairly, for example. But
there is also a deeper concern that arises when differential pricing becomes widespread and
remains opaque, a concern that affects the moral foundations of a free market. In the case
of 19th century railroads, society, led by business groups, demanded a more transparent
and level playing field. The setting where a monopoly infrastructure business, in pursuit of
its own ends, could take arbitrary steps that would ruin one business and make another
succeed, were regarded as inimical to a really free market. It resembled far too much the
widely disliked markets without property rights, dominated by a capricious political
power. So what followed was a long period of increasingly stringent regulation. Critics
later complained about “regulatory capture”, in which the regulated industries controlled
the regulated. And that was certainly true. Those industries did gain stability, while society
gained a precarious sense of fairness. (It was precarious since the differential pricing
incentives could not be ignored completely, and all those legions of lawyers and
economists argued about a myriad of cases, as various players tried to push the boundaries
of acceptable behavior.) Some economic efficiency was lost, at least in the short term, but
that seemed to be regarded as acceptable.

6

Future of pricing

The history of railroads suggests some general trends in how pricing will develop, Odlyzko
(2003a). One is that the differential pricing incentive will continue to operate, and that
sellers will continue pressing against, and often transgressing, whatever rules are set up.
(Railroad history is full of examples of companies pledging to refrain from price
discrimination, either because of new laws, or because of voluntary cartel arrangements
with their competitors, and then immediately breaking such pledges.) The eager reception
that technologies such as Deep Packet Inspection, IMS, and others receive from service
operators surely reflects this tendency.
To what extent such technologies are actually going to be used is another question.
There will be much experimentation to see what society will accept. The Harvard-like
policy might be the dream for all sellers, but will seldom be achieved, and certainly not in
the near future. Starbucks will not suddenly declare that the price of a cup of coffee will be
49

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

$2, $5, or $7, depending on how much Starbucks thinks a particular individual might be
able and willing to pay, based on that person’s history of Starbucks purchases as well as
income and assets, with a “standard list price” of $10 per cup for those who insist on
remaining anonymous. (But note that prescription drugs in the U.S. are approaching that
type of pricing.) On the other hand, Starbucks (and other coffee shops, there is nothing
special about Starbucks) will likely experiment with what is nowadays called “behavioral
targeting”, in which individuals get customized ads depending on a variety of factors. The
ones that are usually cited are time of day and proximity to the nearest store. But the
incentive will clearly be to incorporate into the creation of these ads particular individuals’
willingness and ability to pay. So, for example, a lover of Starbucks coffee who is not price
sensitive might receive on his cell phone discount coupons that average $0.50 per cup,
while somebody who does not care whether he drinks coffee from Starbucks or
McDonald’s might get discount offers of $1.50. The offers will vary from instance to
instance, so they will not always be $0.50 and $1.50 for those individuals, making it harder
to detect what is happening. But the average discounts will be different, and will enable
sellers to realize some of the benefits of the ideal form of differential pricing.
This may sound like a “brave new world”, but glimpses of it do occasionally appear.
For example, consider the descriptions of a car dealer network in Grow and Epstein (2007)
that does not post prices, and determines what to offer to its (poor and financially
unsophisticated) customers based on detailed information about their position. And, of
course, we do have Harvard and other elite private schools that practice extreme forms of
differential pricing, and medical care appears to be moving in that direction, Odlyzko
(2003a). We do not know exactly what forms of price discrimination society will accept.
So we should expect experimentation, hidden as much as sellers can manage, but
occasionally erupting in protests, and those protests leading to sellers pulling back, at least
partially. And occasionally we should expect government action, when the protests grow
severe. (However, based on historical precedents we should expect governments to often
pay lip service to public demands, while in practice tolerating and even promoting
differential pricing, because of its positive economic effects, see Odlyzko (2003a).)

7

How to justify Google’s stock price

The precise form that price discrimination will take is impossible to predict, and the
Starbucks scenario above is just one way the future can be approached. But there is huge
potential in it, and it may be what has led to the huge stock market valuation of Google.
Serving up the standard online ads has turned out to be extremely profitable. (In another
instance of the difficulty of technological predictions, this is contrary to general
expectations as recently as the peak of the Internet bubble in 2000, when the consensus
was that such ads were not a promising revenue source.) And there are plenty more ads
that can migrate online. But there are limits, since the advertising field is not all that large.
(The total amount spent on advertising is lower than spending on voice telephony.) But if
“behavioral targeting” can be exploited, extensive price discrimination would open up
entirely new, and much larger, revenue sources. (Enterprises already spend on direct
marketing and other promotions amounts comparable to what they spend on ads, and
effective differential pricing could replace and augment that.) And the company in control
of the process, the one with the information about customers, and in control of the delivery

50

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

of the offers, could potentially end up in control of product pricing, essentially relegating
the good and service providers to a commodity role. The profit potential of such a role is
gigantic.
Yet another way that Google could justify its high valuation would be if the current
hype about “cloud computing” becomes reality. If most of our data and computing migrate
into a distributed network of processors and storage, entirely new opportunities would
arise. Given the economics and the technology, with the “first mover advantage”,
“economies of scale,” and similar factors, cloud computing could easily become dominated
by one or a handful of players, who might then have huge power, and a corresponding
profit potential. And Google is ideally positioned to grab such a role, since its core
expertise is in deploying a distributed information technology infrastructure. In either
scenario, though, Google (or Yahoo! or Microsoft, or Facebook, or some other entity that
might reach a position to exploit its position in the ways outlined here) would have to tread
very carefully, since the public could easily decide its practices amounted to “being evil”.
For Google (or some other entity) to fully exploit the potential of differential pricing or
of cloud computing (and the latter would surely also involve extensive price
discrimination), it is necessary to have a communications infrastructure that either that
entity controls, or that is approximately net neutral. Otherwise, the communications
network could grab the profits by charging differential fees to Google that would absorb
most of the benefits, or could deploy its own competing “cloud” which might be less
efficient, but could exclude competitors.

8

Fairness and rules

The basic conclusion is that whether AT&T or Google wins the net neutrality battle, the
outcome at a high level may be similar, namely society exposed to the prospect of an
unprecedented degree of discrimination. It is doubtful that competition could mitigate the
risks. On one hand, there is doubt whether one could have a viable system with enough
separate physical networks for effective competition. We already have, in most of the
United States, two separate networks. The case is made below that there are already
sufficient revenues to allow both networks to deliver high speed connectivity. But a
duopoly can hardly be expected to provide a competitive market. On the other hand, it
does not seem feasible to pay for five separate physical networks, say. (And even if one
could get enough funding, one would then have to face the issue that surfaced prominently
with railroads about 170 years ago, namely whether such wasteful duplication would be
preferable to the inefficiency of regulation or government ownership.)
It is not even clear whether a duopoly would be stable. (And, it must be admitted, that
it is not even certain that the wireline networks will continue to maintain their revenues,
since it is voice connectivity that is the most valuable service, and voice is rapidly
migrating to wireless.) In cyberspace, the “winner take all” phenomenon is very
pronounced. And in addition, in the online world, strategic gaming and tacit collusion are
easy (as the electric power “crisis” in California demonstrated recently). Furthermore, we
have extensive historical evidence that competition often leads to increases in price
discrimination.
To what extent the winner of the net neutrality debate might actually be able to exploit
the opportunities that victory would offer will depend on how people react. It is not just the

51

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

existing laws and regulations that matter, but public reaction. Because one of the key
lessons from the past is that governments do respond to popular concerns about the
functioning of markets. People have often called on governments to intervene when they
got upset with what they perceived as unfair rules. (Whether that intervention takes place
through laws, regulations, or courts intervening to invoke common carriage rules is a
different question, and will surely differ from country to country, as it has in the past.) We
see this happening today in the European mandate to lower international roaming fees in
wireless voice, Blau (2007). On purely economic grounds, those high fees can easily be
justified since they are charged on the calls that are likely to be most valuable. (And that
those high discriminatory fees existed even in a competitive market shows something that
has been visible for a long time, namely that competition is not necessarily a barrier to
price discrimination.) But they offended the public sense of fairness, and so they are being
reduced through explicit government mandates and the threat of such mandates. People did
not resort to the technical means of circumventing those fees, but instead insisted on
changing the rules of the marketplace. Hence, we should not take the general lack of
concern about their privacy by people as indicating that any uses of private information
will be acceptable. If people perceive such information is used against them (as in
differential pricing, which typically elicits strongly negative reactions), they are likely to
call on government to fix the problem.
The general conclusion is that some form of government intervention, to set the rules,
is inevitable. (And at some point it may be welcomed by the players, just as government
intervention was welcomed in the end by the railroads.) Society needs basic rules to
operate by, and modern technology creates potential scenarios that old rules did not cover.
But we need to remember also that it is not easy to regulate markets, especially ones in
cyberspace, and especially when policy makers labor under the burden of many false
myths.
As was mentioned before, railroads initially were subject to structural separation, but
governments found it impossible to enforce this. (See Jackman (1916, Chapter 9) for more
information about the transition of British railways to become carriers instead of just
providers of rail roads.) And we have more modern evidence of the need for clear
interfaces in telecommunications for effective regulation, Faulhaber (2003). It appears very
difficult to regulate a packet data network like the Internet, which depends for its basic
justification on statistical multiplexing. As has been pointed out before, the Internet has not
been “net neutral” in the past, and it is not one now. The question of how one deals with
legitimate network management issues, as well as with services that appear to reside most
naturally in the network, is a thorny one. Extending (with appropriate modifications)
traditional regulatory approaches to the Internet, as proposed, for example, in Weiser
(2008), may very well be the eventual outcome, but it would not be easy, and will continue
to provide lifetime employment to legions of lawyers and economists.
It would be far easier to enforce neutrality rules on a network that provided dark fiber
or wavelengths only, which would be sold to service providers, who would then provide
higher level services. That, of course, would require a complete restructuring of the
industry. It might be wise, both for society and for shareholders of those companies, but
very hard to achieve.
While technology imposes constraints on how effective regulation can be, it also
imposes constraints on what service providers can do. Especially when the most valued
services, such as voice, texting, and even simple search, are low bandwidth, it is hard for

52

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

service providers to effectively regulate traffic (and thereby extract value), at least without
very intrusive measures, which would likely be resented and could lead to protests and
government intervention. The strategy of controlling just streaming video traffic is very
unlikely to be productive.

9

Financial markets and the future of net neutrality

The importance of price discrimination in enabling deployment of infrastructure industries
has been recognized by policy makers for a long time. Not only was it enshrined in the toll
schedules of railroads, canals, and turnpikes, but there are historical examples where an
increased level of discrimination was allowed in order to save a floundering enterprise.
Odlyzko (2004a) cites the Beverley Beck Navigation in the 18th century, in which the
initial (already discriminatory) toll schedule was modified by the British Parliament to
allow for a greater differential in charges for different goods. This was not an isolated case.
In 1845, in order to fortify canals in their losing struggle with the rapidly expanding
railway industry, Parliament passed a law explicitly authorizing canals to be their own
carriers (something only a few had been permitted to be in the past), and giving them some
leeway to vary their tolls, Jackman (1916, Chapter 9). (This attempt to keep the canals as
viable competitors to railways did not succeed.) And as the Suez Canal was opening, when
its financial prospects looked bleak, the Economist of Nov. 20, 1869 suggested that Suez
tolls should be changed from the simple fixed fee per ton of cargo ship capacity and per
passenger to ones that depended on the value of cargo. (This advice was not followed.)
Thus there are precedents for telecom companies to ask for ability to charge special
fees to companies like Google that might be deriving large profits from the use of the
infrastructure. The question is, do they need it? And there is little evidence that they do.
Extensive price discrimination was tolerated on railroads, even under regulation.
However, railroads were a giant industry faced with demands for further expansion. In the
U.S. in 1907, their revenues were almost 8% of the Gross National Product, U.S.
Department of Commerce, 1975. (By comparison, today telecommunications in the U.S. is
at about 3-4%, depending on what is counted. Back in 1907, it was around 1.2%, if we
count postal services, telegraph, and telephone, and the Post Office accounted for more
than half of that total, Odlyzko (2000).) Furthermore, railroads were struggling with rising
costs, as the demand for local transport grew, and rail technology was not suited to satisfy
it. Telecommunications today is in a different environment, with most costs in a steep
decline. This is only partly due to the Internet. Already almost a decade ago, it was
estimated that the entire plant of the U.S. phone companies, which had cost about $340
billion, could be duplicated for about $180 billion, or roughly half, Stuck and Weingarten
(2002). Further technological advances have taken place since then, so current costs would
likely be lower, even in nominal dollars. (This evolution has been partially hidden by the
rise of spending on wireless, which has kept total costs, revenues and profits high.)
Basically, of the three main segments of traditional telephony, access, switching and long
distance, which ages ago were regarded as about equally expensive, the second and third
have shrunk dramatically, and the access piece dominates. (For a discussion of how
inexpensive the backbones of the Internet are, see Odlyzko (2003b). And for evidence that
those infamous “exafloods” are not swamping the Internet, see Cho et al (2008) and

53

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

Minnesota Internet Traffic Studies (MINTS)2). That is why capital expenditure (capex) of
the telcos has been weak, as their replacement cost has been consistently lower than their
depreciation charges. And that is what has helped produce the bountiful free cash flow and
profits of recent years.
Further evidence that telcos do not need vast new revenues to be able to afford a
buildout of broadband networks comes from international comparisons. In many other
countries, far faster networks are available at lower prices. Even if one makes allowances
for differentials in labor costs, taxes, and the like, it seems that broadband networks are all
that expensive to build.
There certainly are some widely publicized claims that huge increases in investment
are needed to provide widespread broadband connectivity. Probably the most extreme one
is a study from AT&T, Clarke (2007), which claims that what it calls “fully unmanaged IP
networks” would require “between $143 and $416 per month” per connection. The detailed
cost estimates in the Appendix to Clarke (2007) are questionable. (As Dave Burstein has
pointed out in a private communication, if they were correct, AT&T’s U-verse service
would be ruinously expensive to provide, contradicting what AT&T, has been telling its
investors.) But even if they were correct, they would be almost irrelevant. The basic
assumption of Clarke (2007) is that the “fully unmanaged IP networks” would need to be
built today, with today’s technology and at today’s prices, and would need to
accommodate essentially all foreseeable demands today. In particular, they would need to
provide for transmission of all the video consumed today, but at higher resolution, all over
the basic Internet access link. But in practice, Internet usage is not changing all that
rapidly. Recent studies from Japan, which has bandwidths to the home comparable to what
Clarke’s “fully unmanaged IP networks” envisage, show very slow spread of video, Cho et
al (2008). The abstract of that study concludes that “observed trends ... suggest that video
content is unlikely to disastrously overflow the Internet, at least not anytime soon”. And
the title of that study talks of “slow crustal movement in residential user traffic”. Internet
traffic growth is still fast, but has been slowing down, from about 100% per year towards
about 50% in 2008, Minnesota Internet Traffic Studies (2008).
The economics of building new communications networks (or upgrading old ones,
improved technology is allowing us to push far more data through the old twisted pair or
coax connections that are in place) is very complicated, and this is not the place to get into
it in detail. But there is far too little informed discussion of this topic in connection with
net neutrality. Yet there evidence that costs of providing broadband connectivity, at current
growth rates in data traffic, and current rates of technological improvement, are not huge.
As just one example one can cite the projections made in Carphone Warehouse by an
independent facilities-based ISP in the United Kingdom.3
In general, projections by electronic and photonic equipment suppliers all suggest that
current traffic growth rates of about 50% per year Minnesota Internet Traffic Studies
(2008) can be maintained without dramatic boosts in capital investment.
Yet more circumstantial evidence that non-discriminatory communications systems
should be viable comes from the wireline voice network. That is still the big revenue
producer on the wireline side, but operates in an exemplary net neutral fashion, and is, to

2

http://www.dtc.umn.edu/mints
Carphone Warehouse “Annual Strategy Day,” presentation, April 15, 2008. http://library.corporateir.net/library/12/123/123964/items/287985/Analyst_Day_150408_Pres.pdf
3

54

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

an increasing extent, paid for by flat fees, those same flat fees that the telecom industry has
disdained and misunderstood for over a century.
Some more evidence comes from the costs of the electric distribution system and
others. In particular, the electric system reaches out further than the wireline phone system,
yet is operated at a fraction of the cost of the latter (and in a very neutral fashion). Now of
course electricity distribution does not have the switching costs of the telecom network,
but it is those switching costs that are plummeting, as Moore’s laws continue operating.
What remains (relatively) expensive is just the cost of getting the physical conduit to the
consumer.
The current campaign to justify high revenues and differential pricing on the Internet is
reminiscent of the campaign in the late 1990s by telcos to charge special fees on dial
Internet access. The argument then was that the long holding times on Internet access calls
made with modems were wreaking havoc with the carefully planned telco equipment, and
were making flat rate pricing unviable. Had regulators in the U.S. listened to such
pleadings, the growth of the Internet would undoubtedly been greatly impeded. However,
they instead turned a deaf ear and allowed flat rate to continue to apply for modem calls to
the Internet. The result was a boom in profits for the telcos. In the first place, their
complaints about increased traffic were very suspect, since that traffic was achieved
largely through customers leasing extra lines just for Internet access, as is seen in Table 1
on p.36 of Odlyzko (1998) (although it should be mentioned that later in the 1990s, beyond
the 1996 figure that was the most current at the time of writing of that report, average total
length of calls per line did go up somewhat). Further, Internet access was concentrated
later in the day (or night, to be precise) than voice calls, so did not interfere as much as
claimed with basic traffic. And, finally, costs of switching equipment declined rapidly
during that period. And so none of the predicted disasters materialized, and the industry
thrived. Thus to correctly evaluate claims about need for additional revenues for
broadband networks, one needs solid cost data and a dynamic model of the industry. At the
moment we do not have either one available.
We should also remember that even with net neutrality rules in place, service providers
would still be able to segment the market by speed of connections. Since the main value of
data networks resides in provision of low transaction latency, Odlyzko (1999), not of
capacity for streaming video at modest rates, this might very well be sufficient to
differentiate among users, and yet still preserve the flat rate pricing those customers insist
on.
While the telcos probably do not need to engage in differential pricing to pay for
broadband networks, they may very well need such pricing to support their stock prices.
But that is where we get into the great puzzle of the current financial markets. Returns on
invested capital are very high, generally over 15% per year, a historical record. And they
have been that high for several years, and they have been that high worldwide. This has
been explained as a result of the entry of many developing countries, especially China and
India, into the world economy. This essentially doubled the world labor force, while the
stock of capital goods increased only a little. In this view, high equity returns are simply
the outcome of a changed capital to labor ratio, with more going to pay for scarce capital
than for abundant labor. This is a reasonable argument, but it does not explain why longterm interest rates were as low as they were for a long time (on the order of 5% for high
grade corporate bonds through early 2008. The contrast between 5 and 15% is striking.
After all, equity and bonds are just two forms of finance, and while equity has traditionally

55

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

earned more than bonds, it is hard to explain a gap this wide. Why doesn’t someone
borrow at the low interest rates and compete away those abnormally high equity returns?
(The big borrowing binge by hedge funds and private equity funds was largely for
financial investments, not for new brick and mortar facilities, nor for software
development.) That was the big puzzle. The current (late 2008 and early 2009) financial
crisis may be eliminate this puzzle. Another anomaly of the financial markets of the last
few years was the unusually high fraction of corporate profits that were coming from the
financial sector. But the huge writedowns by financial institutions in late 2007 and 2008,
including several bankruptcies and wide government interventions, show that to a large
extent those profits were a delusion, caused by defective accounting for value and risk.
One possible outcome of the financial crash might paradoxically be that it will
encourage greater investment in telecommunications infrastructure. Even aside from
government funding for economic stimulus, the crash might, after main turbulence
subsides, lead to more realistic expectations of investment returns, which will make longterm investments in projects such as fiber to the home more attractive.
However, the great puzzle of the financial markets is resolved, cable companies and
telcos definitely contributed to it. As is described in Odlyzko (2003b), their valuations
before the crash of 2008 were considerably above their replacement cost. (This was also
true for most of other industries, result of those abnormally high equity returns.) As a
rough approximation, it appeared that the valuations of both the cable and the telco sides
assumed that they would get the entire telecommunications spending of the economy. That
might be true for one or the other, but not for both, at least not unless they could somehow
induce huge new increases in those expenditures, possibly by exploiting the potential of
discriminatory pricing.
Policy makers in the U.S. have limited tools with which to induce deployment of
broadband networks. But it is very doubtful whether imposing some sort of net neutrality
would impede that policy goal, as the current rate of deployment seems gated by other
considerations. Some form of net neutrality mandate, hard as it would be to define and
enforce, might be more appropriate, in order to promote the development of the
applications that will provide value to users and make them willing to spend on “dumb
pipe” broadband, which might be much more effective in stimulating investment by
current players. Left to themselves, current operators would surely concentrate on building
out systems optimized for content delivery. Yet, as has been easy to predict from historical
precedents, Odlyzko (2000) and Odlyzko (2001a), the most promising avenues for
stimulating interest in broadband by users is by promoting social interactivity. In that
sense, success of services like YouTube and Facebook was very natural and predictable,
yet it caught the industry by surprise. Thus simply providing more funding for current
operators is likely to be wasteful, in that it would either be pocketed as extra profit, or
spent in wasteful ways. The one thing that has been well documented (see, for example,
Odlyzko (2004b)) is that established service providers are terrible at innovation in services.
Their core expertise is in widespread delivery of basic connectivity, and they, and their
suppliers, have done well in innovating there, introducing DSL, cable modems, wireless
transmission technologies, DWDM, and so on. But they have failed utterly in end-user
services. The great success story to date in wireless data is texting, which was an
accidental by-product of the GSM technology development, not meant for consumer use.
Even the one shining example of a successful content service, ring tone downloads, came
as a surprise. At the 2004 OFC conference, where I pointed this out in a presentation, one

56

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

of the later speakers, a prominent U.S. telco executive, was clearly offended, and
responded with a declaration that the industry was very innovative. But the only example
he could cite was Caller ID!
A structural separation, or strict net neutrality regime, could be beneficial for
shareholders of the service provider companies, as it would enable those enterprises to
concentrate on their core expertise, which is to provide basic connectivity, those much
derided “dumb pipes”. Commodity services do not have to be unprofitable, after all. And
recent moves, in particular the 2007 iPhone deal that AT&T concluded with Apple, may
reflect the growing realization that the main sources of innovation in services are and will
continue to come from outside. And with greater innovation, one can expect greater growth
in demand for the basic transmission capacity (just as flat rate Internet access stimulated
demand for basic voice lines in the late 1990s, and led to increased profits for telcos, even
though they did not contribute a whit to anything on the Internet itself). But the vertical
integration case will surely continue to be pursued because of its revenue and profit
attractions. And note that the “cloud computing” idea is actually an extreme form of
vertical integration, just carried out by other companies than the telecom service providers,
and at higher levels of the protocol stack. There are attractions to end-users in some levels
of vertical integration. The concept of a do-it-yourself end-to-end network is attractive, but
few users have the skills and patience to make it a reality. So we will likely see extensive
vertical integration, the only question is where, and what dangers will it produce.
The basic conclusion is that for pervasive infrastructure services that are crucial for the
functioning of society, rules about allowable degrees of discrimination have traditionally
applied, and are likely to be demanded for the Internet in the future. Those rules have often
been set by governments, and are likely to be set by them in the future as well. For
telecommunications, given current trends in demand and in rate and sources of innovation,
it appears to be better for society not to tilt towards the operators, and instead to stimulate
innovation on the network by others by enforcing net neutrality. But this would likely open
the way for other players, such as Google, that emerge from that open and competitive
arena as big winners, to become choke points. So it would be wise to prepare to monitor
what happens, and be ready to intervene by imposing neutrality rules on them when
necessary.

10

References

Alleman, J. and P. Rappoport (2007) The Future of Communications in Next Generation
Networks, White Paper for the 2007 ITU Workshop on The Future of Voice.
http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/voice/papers/FoV-Alleman-Rappoport-Final.pdf
Ankeny, J. (2008) “Survey: Texting Remains Top Consumer Draw,” Fierce Mobile
Content, July 2.
Anonymous (1847) “The Policy and Prospects of the South-Eastern Railway Company,”
Monthly Railway Record, 11-25.
Blau, J. (2007) “Threat of Regulation Prompts Lower EU Roaming Fees,” InfoWorld,
April 11.

57

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

Brin, S. and L. Page (1998) “The Anatomy of a Large-scale Hypertextual Web Search
Engine,” Presented at the 7th International World-Wide Web Conference, Brisbane,
Australia, April. http://www7.scu.edu.au/1921/com1921.htm
Cho, K, K. Fukuda, H. Esaki, and A. Kato (2008) “Observing Slow Crustal Movement in
Residential User Traffic,” ACM CoNEXT 2008 Conference, December.
http://www.iijlab.net/~kjc/papers/kjc-conext2008.pdf
Clarke, R. N. (2007) “Costs of Neutral/Unmanaged IP Networks,” Review of Network
Economics, 8: 61-89.
U.S. Department of Commerce (1975) “Bureau of the Census,” Historical Statistics of the
United States: Colonial Times to 1970.
Economides, N. and J. Tag (2007) “Net Neutrality on the Internet: A Two-sided Market
Analysis,”
NET
Institute
Working
Paper
#07-45,
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1019121
Faulhaber , G. (2003) “Policy-induced Competition: The Telecommunications
Experiments,” Information Economics & Policy, 15: 73-97.
Federal Communications Commission (2008) “Order for Comcast to End Discriminatory
Network Management Practices,” Aug. 18. http://www.fcc.gov/comcast-nr-080108.pdf
Fishburn, P. C., A. M. Odlyzko, and R. C. Siders (1997) “Fixed Fee Versus Unit Pricing
for Information Goods: Competition, Equilibria, and Price Wars,” First Monday, 2(7),
July.
Gabel, D. (1987) The Evolution of a Market: The Emergence of Regulation in the
Telephone Industry of Wisconsin, 1893-1917. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of WisconsinMadison.
Grow, B. and K. Epstein (2007) “The Poverty Business: Inside U.S. Companies’
Audacious Drive to Extract More Profits from the Nation’s Working Poor,” Business
Week, May 21.
Hadley, A. T. (1885) Railroad Transportation: Its History and its Laws. G. P. Putnam’s
Sons: New York.
Healy, K. T. (1940) The Economics of Transportation in America., Ronald Press: New
York.
Hogendorn, C. (2007) “Broadband Internet: Net Neutrality Versus Open Access,”
International Economics and Economic Policy, 4: 185-208.
Kirby, M. W. (1993) The Origins of Railway Enterprise: The Stockton and Darlington
Railway, 1821-1863. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.

58

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

Jackman, W. T. (1916) The Development of Transportation in Modern England.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Lardner D. (1846) “Railways at Home and Abroad,” Edinburgh Review, vol. 84: 479-531.
Levinson, D. and A. M. Odlyzko (2008) “Too Expensive to Meter: The influence of
Transaction Costs in Transportation and Communication,” Phiosophical Transactions
Royal Society A, 366: 2033-2046.
Mohammed A. (2006) “Verizon Executive Calls for End to Google’s ‘Free Lunch’,”
Washington Post, February 7.
Odlyzko, A. M. (1996) “The Bumpy Road of Electronic Commerce,” in H. Maurer (ed.),
WebNet 96 – World Conference Web Society Proceedings: 378-89, Association for the
Advancement of Computing in Education: Charlottesville, Virginia.
Odlyzko, A. M. (1998) “The Economics of the Internet: Utility, Utilization, Pricing, and
Quality of Serice,” Unpublished Manuscript, AT&T Labs – Research white paper, July 7.
http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/internet.economics.pdf
Odlyzko, A. M. (1999) “The Current State and Likely Evolution of the Internet,”
Proeedings Globecom’99, 1869-1875, IEEE: New York.
Odlyzko, A. M. (2000) “The History of Communications and its Implications for the
Internet,” AT&T, http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/history.communications0.pdf
Odlyzko, A. M. (2001a) “Content is Not King,” First Monday, 6(2), February.
Odlyzko, A. M. (2001b) “Internet Pricing and the History of Communications,” Computer
Networks, 36: 493-517.
Odlyzko, A. M. (2003a) “Privacy, economics, and price discrimination on the Internet,” in
N. Sadeh (ed.), ICEC2003: Fifth International Conference on Electronic Commerce, ACM
Press: New York.
Odlyzko, A. M. (2003b) “The Many Paradoxes of Broadband,” First Monday, 8(9), Sept.
Odlyzko, A. M. (2004a) “The Evolution of Price Discrimination in Transportation and its
Implications for the Internet,” Review of Network Economics, 3: 323-46.
Odlyzko, A. M. (2004b) “Telecom Dogmas and Spectrum Allocations,” White Paper,
http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/telecom.dogmas.spectrum.pdf
Singer, H. J. (2007) “Net Neutrality: A Radical Form of Non-discrimination,” Regulation,
30: 36-41.
Stuck, B. and M. Weingarten (2002) “A Tale of Two Decisions,” Business
Communications Review, July: 47-48.

59

Review of Network Economics

Vol.8, Issue 1 – March 2009

van Schewick, B. (2007) “Towards an economic framework for network neutrality
regulation,” Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law, 5: 329-91.
Tschang, C.-C. (2009) “China’s Baidu.com Accused of Rigging Search,” Business Week,
January 12.
Warner, B. (2007) “Are the Mobile Networks Backing the Wrong Horse?” Times Online,
October 17.
Weiser, P. (2008) “The Next Frontier for Network Neutrality,” Administrative Law
Review, 60: 1-50.
Whitacre E. (2005) “At SBC, It’s All About ‘Scale and Scope’,” Interview with Business
Week, available at Business Week Online, Nov. 7.
Wilke, J. R. and D. Clark (2004) “Microsoft is Facing More Telling E-mails in Minnesota
Lawsuit,” Wall Street Journal, March 17.
Wilson, C. (2006) “TELECOMNEXT: Net Neutrality a Bogus Debate,” Telephony Online,
March 22.
Yoo, C. (2008) “Network Neutrality, Consumers, and Innovation,” University of
Pennsylvania Law School, Public Law Research Paper No. 08-40, October 3.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1262845.

60

