            FAIRness and Usability for Open-access Omics Data Systems

   Daniel C. Berrios, MD MPH PhD1,4, Afshin Beheshti, PhD2,4, Sylvain V. Costes, PhD3,4
               1Universities Space Research Association; 2KBRwyle; 3NASA
                      4NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA




Abstract
Omics data sharing is crucial to the biological research community, and the last decade or two has seen a huge rise
in collaborative analysis systems, databases, and knowledge bases for omics and other systems biology data. We
assessed the “FAIRness” of NASA’s GeneLab Data Systems (GLDS) along with four similar kinds of systems in the
research omics data domain, using 14 FAIRness metrics. The range of overall FAIRness scores was 6-12 (out of 14),
average 10.1, and standard deviation 2.4. The range of Pass ratings for the metrics was 29-79%, Partial Pass 0-
21%, and Fail 7-50%. The systems we evaluated performed the best in the areas of data findability and accessibility,
and worst in the area of data interoperability. Reusability of metadata, in particular, was frequently not well
supported. We relate our experiences implementing semantic integration of omics data from some of the assessed
systems for federated querying and retrieval functions, given their shortcomings in data interoperability. Finally, we
propose two new principles that Big Data system developers, in particular, should consider for maximizing data
accessibility.
Introduction
Over the last decade the vast increase in outputs from “omics” (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and
metabolomics) assays, together with decreasing assay and data storage costs, have resulted in an exponentially
increasing volume of these “big” data. The high feature-number aspect of these big data has highlighted the
importance of data sharing (or reuse) functions of these systems, as data sets often have relevance for investigating a
very large number of hypotheses. Thus, developers of big data systems increasingly are focusing on the needs of users
to discover, annotate, share, and analyze data. Omics data sharing is especially crucial to the biological research
community, and the last decade or two has seen a huge rise in collaborative analysis systems 1-3, databases 4-14, and
knowledge bases15-17 for omics and other systems biology data.
The FAIR18 principles are a set of guiding principles that are being advocated as foundational in the broad areas of
data findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reusability. However, the challenges involved in using current
technologies and real-world infrastructures within organizational guidelines to develop data repositories and/or data
analytical systems that are “FAIR” are substantial. The FAIR principles deal with aspects of data handling such as
identification, representation, and attribution. Metrics to evaluate the “FAIRness” of a data system or its design are
also currently being developed19. System developers should consider familiarizing themselves with these metrics, as
many of the FAIR principles can have significant implications in terms of feasible design options and operations
resource planning.
We assessed the “FAIRness” of NASA’s GeneLab Data Systems (GLDS), along with four systems in the research
omics data domain chosen for their similarity to the GLDS, using 14 FAIRness metrics. We relate these assessments
in the context of discussion of the FAIRness concepts for the design of Big Data omics systems in particular, relating
some of the challenges we faced developing the GLDS as a FAIR data system. In addition to designing a data system
to be FAIR, developers of Big Data systems in particular should consider how system design can maximize data
usability for its users. We propose two new design principles for FAIR systems that handle Big Data like omics data
from our experiences developing the GLDS. By complying with these usability principles and the FAIR principles
together, systems that manage Big Data can maximize both the usability and reusability of data.
Methods
NASA GeneLab
GeneLab (http://genelab.nasa.gov) is a NASA initiative designed to accelerate “open science” biomedical research in
support of the human exploration of space and the improvement of life on earth.20 GeneLab data have been used to
research impacts of space on mice, humans, and plants. Phase I of GeneLab Data Systems (GLDS) project
implemented an “omics” (genomics, transcriptomics proteomics, and metabolomics) data repository for biomedical



                                                        232
research data conducted in or relevant to space environments (Figure 1). This initial phase developed processes and
systems for data submission, curation, indexing, search, and retrieval. In Phase II GeneLab implemented federated
search and retrieval capabilities for data hosted by GeneLab and three other open-access, omics data systems, in order
to facilitate data integration and biological meta-investigation (Figure 1a).21 (Note that these targets for search
federation were selected independently and using different criteria than the data systems evaluated in this paper). Such
meta-investigations are key to corroborating findings from different studies and/or kinds of bioassay data, and




Figure 1. The GeneLab Data Systems (GLDS). (a) The GeneLab Data Repository. The federated search interface
shown includes not only search of GLDS repository data, but of the extramural data sources Gene Expression
Omnibus (“GEO”4), PRoteomics IDEntifications repository (“EBI PRIDE”5), and the Metagenomics Analysis server
(“ANL MG-RAST”6). (b) The GLDS Workspace. (c) GLDS Tools for omics data analysis (part of a Galaxy server1).




                                                         233
translating them into systems biology knowledge and, eventually, therapeutics22. In Phase III, GeneLab has begun to
deploy an omics data analysis platform as part of the GLDS. Using this platform, investigators can design, execute
and share in silico experimentation of omics data sets (Figures 1b and 1c). At the end of Phase III, users with results
of these kinds of experiments will be able to store them directly into the GLDS repository, linked to originating data
and to the analysis workflows that generated them.
Even though the inception of the GLDS predated publication of the FAIR principles, many of the concepts behind the
principles were discussed extensively prior to its design. These discussions included substantial input from the
National Academies of Sciences and a steering committee of outside experts in omics biological data, and had
significant impacts on selection of technological approaches and system architectures, required resources for
development and operations, and policies developed for operating the GLDS. In the absence of best practices from
the community in certain areas of design and policy (Figure 2), we wondered how we might assess the impact on
FAIRness of the design and policy choices we faced, and how the GLDS would compare in FAIRness to other open-
access, Big Data systems.
FAIRness of Omics Data
The FAIR principles were designed to guide the management of data so that it is maximally findable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable. They are not precise prescriptions for FAIR system design specifications; rather they are
aspirational guidelines with some references to exemplar standards and technologies. Among the findability principles
are requirements that data be assigned a persistent, global unique identifier (GUID), be described by rich metadata,
and be indexed by a system for retrieving the data. Accessibility requires the use of standardized, open (available for
implementation to all) communications protocols for retrieval of data by GUID. Interoperability is supported through
the use of machine-actionable metadata and data. Reusability requires systems to be compliant in the management of




   FINDABILITY                                                 Metadata                                            INTEROPERABILITY
                                                              Normalization


          F1 (meta)data are assigned a globally             Inferring               I1 (meta)data use a formal, accessible,
             unique and persistent identifier          Data Relationships              shared, and broadly applicable
          F2 data are described with rich metadata                                     language for knowledge representation.
             (defined by R1 below)                                                  I2 (meta)data use vocabularies that follow
          F3 metadata clearly and explicitly include                                   FAIR principles
             the identifier of the data it describes     Data Federation            I3 (meta)data include qualified references
          F4 (meta)data are registered or indexed in                                   to other (meta)data
             a searchable resource
                                                         Processed Data                               Cost-efficient
                       Data                                                                            Metadata
                                                            Metadata
                   Identification                                                                      Acquisition
                                                            Schemas
                     Schemes
             A1 (meta)data are retrievable by their identifier              R1 meta(data) are richly described with a
                 using a standardized communications protocol               plurality of accurate and relevant attributes
             A1.1 the protocol is open, free, and universally               R1.1 (meta)data are released with a clear and
                   implementable                                            accessible data usage license
             A1.2 the protocol allows for an authentication and             R1.2 (meta)data are associated with detailed
                   authorization procedure, where necessary                 provenance
             A2 metadata are accessible, even if data are no                R1.3 (meta)data meet domain-relevant
                 longer available                                           community standards

                                              Integrated
 ACCESSIBILITY                               Credentialing                                                         REUSABILITY


Figure 2. The FAIR principles18, and areas of design and operations of FAIR data systems (white boxes) for which
best practices have yet to be defined.




                                                                  234
 Table 1. The FAIR principles, corresponding draft FAIRness metrics, and semi-quantitative FAIRness ratings for
 select omics data systems. Metrics were those developed by the GO FAIR Metrics23 group.



                                           Pass




                                                                                                                     Metabolights8
                                           Partial pass




                                                                                                          MG-RAST6
                                           Fail




                                                                                                                                     GLDS
                                                                                            GEO4

                                                                                                   ENA7
  FAIR Principle                                                               Metric
  F1. (meta)data are assigned globally unique and persistent identifier        FM-F1A                                            
  F1. (meta)data are assigned globally unique and persistent identifier        FM-F1B                                            
  F2. data are described with rich metadata (defined by R1 below)              FM-F2                                             
  F3. metadata clearly/explicitly include identifier of data it describes      FM-F3                                             
  F4. (meta)data are registered or indexed in a searchable resource            FM-F4                                             
  A1. (meta)data are retrievable by identifier using a standardized
                                                                                                   N/A
  communications protocol
  A1.1 the protocol is open, free, and universally implementable               FM-A1.1                                           
  A1.2 the protocol allows for an authentication and authorization
                                                                               FM-A1.2                                           
  procedure, where necessary
  A2. metadata are accessible, even when data are no longer available          FM-A2                                             
  I1. (meta)data use a formal, accessible, shared, and broadly
                                                                               FM-I1                                             
  applicable language for knowledge representation.
  I2. (meta)data use vocabularies that follow FAIR principles                  FM-I2                                             
  I3. (meta)data include qualified references to other (meta)data              FM-I3                                             
  R1. meta(data) are richly described with a plurality of accurate and
                                                                                                   N/A
  relevant attributes
  R1.1. (meta)data released with clear, accessible data usage license          FM-R1.1                                           
  R1.2. (meta)data are associated with detailed provenance                     FM-R1.2                                           
  R1.3. (meta)data meet domain-relevant community standards                    FM-R1.3                                           
  Overall FAIRness Score                                                                    11     11      6         10.5            12

their data objects with the first three principles, specifically so that data and metadata can be linked and integrated
across FAIR systems.
Each of the authors assessed compliance of four open-access, omics data systems and the GLDS for FAIRness using
the current working draft of the FAIRness metrics developed by the GO FAIR Metrics group23 (Table 1). The four
systems selected were the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA), the
Metagenomics Analysis Server (MG-RAST), and Metabolights. We chose the systems for their similarity to the
GLDS; all are open-access, government-operated or government-funded, research lab-developed omics data systems.
As the FAIR principles themselves are only aspirational, the assessment of the systems can only be at most semi-
quantitative, and they would likely be affected by further clarifications or details in the principles and/or metrics which
are almost certain to come. We rated systems with Pass when we had no evidence of any failure of a test by the metric.
Systems were rated as Partial Pass, if the metric had multiple steps or components, and the system passed some, but
not all; or if we had evidence that some data inputs for the metric yielded a pass, while others did not. We chose Fail
only if we could find no evidence the system was compliant with any part of the metric, for any inputs we tried.
Individually-assessed ratings were then combined into the consensus ratings shown in Table 1 through dialogue among
the raters. Finally, we developed an overall FAIRness Score by assigning a score to each rating of 1 for each Pass,
0.5 for each Partial Pass, and 0 for each Fail and totaling these score for each system.
Summary of FAIRness Assessments
There is quite some variability in FAIRness among the omics data systems we assessed using the 14 metrics. The
range of Pass ratings was 29-79% of metrics, Partial Pass 0-21%, and Fail 7-50%. The range of overall FAIRness




                                                           235
scores was 6-12, with average of 10.1 and standard deviation, 2.4. All the systems were rated best in the areas of data
accessibility and reusability, slightly worse in data findability, and far worse in data interoperability.
Findability
The first findability principle, F1 (Table 1), states that systems should identify data using globally unique and
persistent identifiers; the FM-F1A metric focuses on identifier uniqueness, and FM-F1B on identifier persistence. The
objective is to make data findable, but the implementation of F1 also supports data accessibility (FAIR principle A1).
The qualifier “global” should be interpreted as global within the domain of conceivable use of the data. Thus, it is not
sufficient to use locally (system-specific) controlled processes to manage data identifiers24, as this approach can never
absolutely guarantee against overlap with other systems’ local identifier schemes. In addition, F1 specifies the
persistence of issued identifiers; identification systems that employ Uniform Resource Locators (which rely on
alterable domain name resolution) cannot guarantee persistence of identifiers.
Among the schemes for providing data identifiers, the most reliable over time are likely to be those that use third-
party resolution (versus those that rely on in-house redirection). Third-party resolution identifiers include Digital
Object Identifiers (DOIs) and those provided by identifers.org, among others25. All but one of the systems we assessed
passed the metric for F1 metric by employing persistent, globally unique identifiers with third party resolution. (MG-
RAST only offers such identifiers as an option during data submission, and so was assessed as Partial Pass.) In the
biomedical research and clinical practice realms, publishers have now widely selected the DOI scheme for
identification and citation of literature; more than 80% of 2015 articles indexed by PubMed have assigned DOIs26.
As a consequence, the biomedical community is already (and continues to become more and more) familiar with using
these identifiers to retrieve and cite literature. Yet to date only a few omics data repositories have similarly
implemented DOIs for data publications. Consequently, actual findability and accessibility of data in these repositories
is less than optimal, even though they are technically in compliance with F1, and will continue to be so, unless and
until the biomedical community is trained on how to use other identifying schemes for citing data. Furthermore,
metadata from these repositories are not currently indexed in DOI meta-indexes (such as the one produced by
DataCite27). In order to be compliant with F1 and A1, the GLDS is implementing methods to issue DOIs for all data
publications. Additionally, curated metadata records of the publications are transmitted to DataCite27 for meta-
indexing, increasing the chances for reuse of GLDS-hosted data.
FAIR data also need to be described “with rich metadata” in order to be findable. The draft metric to assess F2
compliance merely requires a metadata description document that specifies a format for machine-readable metadata.
The definition of the term “machine-readable” varies somewhat, but it is generally agreed that it cannot be natural
language. (Although F2 refers to reusability principles requiring data “have a plurality of accurate and relevant
attributes” (R1), the metric for F2 does not attempt to assess compliance with principle R1 [perhaps it should]). All
the systems we assessed passed this metric. Furthermore, all systems passed F3, requiring association of metadata
with data it describes. It should be noted that FM-F3 refers only to IRIs and not broadly to any other kinds of
acceptable data identifiers; we assume that ultimately FM-F3 will be broadened to allow other kinds of F1-compliant
data identifiers. Also, it is difficult to determine if any of the systems truly support IRIs, given that none of them
currently appear to use non-ASCII character encodings in their data identifying schemes.
The FAIRness metric FM-F4 is rather ill-defined currently. It requires submission of an identifier of FAIR data and
its metadata to search engines (which precisely, it does not yet specify, but some common search engines are
mentioned as examples in the comments for the metric). A Pass should be given if the returned search results include
links to the published data (again, it does not yet specify where in the returned results, although among both the top
10 and top 40 are mentioned in metric comments). Some of the systems we assessed failed this metric, and it seems
their data records are likely not indexed by at least some search engines. For example, search of the MG-RAST data
record identified by “http://metagenomics.anl.gov/linkin.cgi?metagenome=mgm4447971.3” or any of its tabular
metadata yielded no search results referring to the repository using Google. More of the systems would fail this
metric if it required data to be submitted specifically to DOI-based search systems (such as DataCite).
Accessibility
All of the systems for which we assessed compliance with FAIR principle A1.1 passed; all use open source
communication protocols to access data, which are retrieved by their identifiers. FAIR Principle A1.2 stipulates that
any protocol used to retrieve data “allows for an authentication and authorization procedure, where necessary.” All
the systems we assessed describe which functions of the system require credentials, and how to obtain the credentials.
It should be noted that A1.2 can be applied to the design of all types of systems, from those with highly restricted




                                                         236
access controls, to the kinds of “open access” systems we assessed, that typically require minimal authentication and
grant the widest possible access to all users. Furthermore, the data in question could be any kind of data, including
raw instrument output, shared data analysis workflows or data products, or scientifically-relevant user comments and
opinions. Even for open access systems, some systems functions such as user-workspace file management, user
commenting and messaging, and user attribution of data always require authentication, because these functions must
necessarily leverage user-specific information.
A specific challenge that GeneLab faced when implementing A1.2 for the GLDS was a diversity of credentialing
services available to the system’s target users, with no single service common to all users. Furthermore, the goal of
GeneLab is to maximize access to GLDS data across all kinds of users, but within the bounds of authentication and
credentialing policies of NASA – another challenge. Aside from policy restrictions, the development of any new
credentialing and authentication functions or services can require considerable resources.
A solution for organizations that are seeking to develop open-access systems is to consider investing in development
of an organization-wide integrated credentialing and authentication architecture (ICAA, Figure 3), and policies for
allowing users to leverage extramural credentials, with appropriate access limitations. ICAAs and attendant policies
can provide flexibility to develop and/or deploy data systems with available resources that can meet policy
requirements of the organization that support extramural user access. It should be noted that using an ICAA to leverage
credentialing systems developed independently from the system requires 1) technical compatibility between the
authentication services of credentialing providers and the ICAA; and 2) compatibility of the credentialing policies of
credentialing organizations and those of the organization developing the data system. Technical compatibility is
facilitated through the use of authentication protocols and standards. Organizational credentialing policy
incompatibility is more problematic to resolve. For example, it may be that the organization deploying the data system
requires credentials be updated at an interval that is different from that required by one or more extramural credential
provider. If these differences cannot be resolved, the only option may be to limit access for some extramural users
data system functions requiring authentication.
NASA is developing an ICAA and adopting policies that permit certain intramural data systems to leverage it for user
credentials and authentication. These policies stipulates that users within the organization must use the organization’s
own credentialing services, while extramural users may authenticate using one from a defined set of externally-
managed credentialing systems (currently including authentication by selected “social media” systems, such as
Google.com credentials). At NASA (and at most U.S. federal agencies), intramural credentialing is quite a long
process involving corroboration of much identifying information. The use of the ICAA, users without NASA
credentials can specify a minimum of information (e.g., only a verifiable email address), which they can provide easily
through a web browser, and gain almost immediate access to the GLDS. Through use of the ICAA, the GLDS is able
to recognize a lower level of confidence when authenticating extramural users, and implement appropriate access
controls to some functions for these users (e.g., they may not join system administrator groups). It seems reasonable
to suggest that an additional principle
be considered when designing FAIR                         Extramural
data systems that have at least some                     Credentialing
                                                                                    Organizational Boundary
functions requiring authentication or                      Services
authorization (A1.2.1 in Table 2). This
principle, would stipulate that an                                                Organizational Credentials

integrated credentialing architecture,
like that shown in Figure 3 be                                                                       Intramural Credentialing
leveraged, in order to offer access to                                                                       Services
data to the widest number of users                  External Credentials
                                                                                         Integrated Credentialing
possible, when and where data policies                                                   & Authentication Service
permit such access.
Most of the systems we assessed for                                                 Authentication
FAIR compliance to A2 have some                                                        Services
policy to retain at least some metadata                                                                Data System
when data are removed from the
system. It is frequently unclear,            Figure 3. Use of an Integrated Credentialing and Authentication
however, which metadata were to be           Architecture (ICAA) to comply with FAIR principle A1.2. The ICAA
retained when data records are               provides services and policies that use information from intra- and extra-
removed from the system. Data                mural credentialing services to authenticate users of a data system.



                                                           237
 Table 2. Additional principles for optimizing data accessibility

   A1.2.1    Authentication protocols should support multiple credential providers
   A3        Data transport should be minimized


systems should ensure that policies for retaining metadata are clearly stated, including which metadata and for what
period of time.
Another factor that specifically affects accessibility to Big Data is data transport. Data to be used as inputs in Big Data
systems, but which are not located in the same environment as executable code of the system, commonly must first
be transported (duplicated or moved) to the environment first. This environment typically is a user-specific
workspace. The transport process for Big Data can require minutes, hours or even days in some Big Data systems,
and represents a significant barrier to efficient access. Designers of Big Data would benefit from a principle that
stipulates the collocation within Big Data systems of data and executable code (A3 in Table 2).
Interoperability
I1 stipulates the “use a formal, accessible, etc. language for knowledge representation. The draft metric for this
principle requires that the language for data or metadata be available by URL, and have a BNF representation. The
comments on the metric suggest additional required language qualities, including that the language must have
semantics (“[‘vanilla’] xml and json ..should fail”). While current knowledge representation languages such as RDF
and OWL28 are available to generate metadata specifications with inherent semantics, tools that leverage such
languages require some sophistication in their use. All the repositories we assessed have metadata specifications that
do not have inherent semantics, and thus would not yield a Pass for this metric. Metabolights and the GLDS both use
the ISATab metadata specification, which can be converted to RDF, and so were rated with Partial Pass.
The metric for principle I2 has a related requirement: that data systems use open, community-developed vocabularies
for data and metadata, and that such vocabularies be more than simple keywords (i.e., include semantics in some
form). As the ISATab specification supported ontological lookup from such vocabularies, we again only rated
Metabolights and the GLDS with Partial Pass, and the rest of the systems as FAIL.
In addition to lack of experience with knowledge representation technologies like RDF and OWL, another likely
reason for lack of compliance of the systems with I1 and I2 is a general lack of available semantic resources developed
by the community to generate metadata specifications and vocabularies, particularly in more recent domains like
genomics, proteomics and metabolomics. We have ourselves sought such resources for use in the GLDS development,
where we are seeking to provide users with omics data analysis capabilities, an omics “workbench” consisting of user-
specific workspaces and data access controls, together with access to a suite of omics analysis tools (see Figure 1b
and Figure 1c). Users of these tools will create data processing (analysis) workflows to transform input data into
“higher-order” data products, which they will likely want to share with others and/or associate with the workflows
and data inputs. One of the challenges we have observed for making these kinds of processed information FAIR
include a lack of semantic resources for creating metadata specifications for such processed data and the processing
workflows that generate them. While schemas like the Common Workflow Language29 (CWL) specification provide
a method to represent and reproduce the mechanics of data processing, they lack domain-specific semantics regarding
the nature of these data transformations (e.g., what are the goals of the transformation from a biological perspective?
What are the biological data concepts produced in output files? how do these relate to input data elements? etc.).
Without these descriptors, systems may not adequately index these processed data and workflows for discovery and
retrieval. While sophisticated users (e.g., trained bioinformaticians) who do encounter processed data and workflows
may be able to understand and reuse them, others without domain-specific experience and knowledge of omics data
processing may not. A challenge for the GLDS will be to help spur the creation of community resources so that it can
implement rich metadata for processed omics data and workflows in a timely fashion.
The objective of the metric for principle I3 is to measure how much data in one system are linked semantically to data
in other systems. It is not surprising that none of the data sources link data “out” to data in external systems in
semantically qualified ways; this is a challenging objective for any data system. (We ignored links to records that
were merely duplicated between systems) Manual linking of data requires subject matter expertise and can be time-
consuming for systems with many data records. Automated linking requires that source and linked data both be




                                                          238
characterized semantically so that links may be inferred. As mentioned above, semantic resources for characterizing
omics data are by and large still forthcoming.
Reusability
R1 is referred to by the findability FAIR principle F2 (see above); at this time there is no metric specifically for R1.
R1.1 requires data systems to provide licenses for data usage (and is curiously intended to facilitate “legal
interoperability” rather than reusability30. All the data repositories we assessed are governmental entities, and as such,
licensing is traditionally prohibited.
R1.2 and R1.3 require that data are published together with provenance metadata, and that data and metadata conform
to community-derived standards, respectively. Such standards include taxonomies, ontologies and other vocabularies
for metadata, and data and file formats. The metric for R1.2 involves the demonstration that a system can provide
FAIR-compliant citational and contextual provenance metadata. While all the repositories provide such metadata,
some do not use FAIR-compliant schemes for these metadata. Similarly, most of the repositories assess and validate
submitted data files (but few validate metadata, as discussed above) against FAIR-schemes and formats.
Discussion
The systems we assessed for FAIRness clearly have shortcomings, particularly in the area of supporting data
interoperability. None of the systems currently use a metadata representation language with sufficient semantics. In
addition, none fully leverage FAIR vocabularies for metadata. There are perhaps several causes at work for these
observations. There are often myriad vocabularies (ontologies) for metadata (each of which is a de facto community
standard) even within a given biological sub-domain, and often much overlap in semantic content between them,
creating the need for systems to be able to “normalize” input metadata across them somehow. For example, the concept
of zero or very low-gravity experimental conditions appears in at least 5 different, widely-used biomedical
vocabularies: SNOMED CT, MeSH, Read Codes Clinical Terms, Psychology Ontology, PLOS Thesaurus, and FAST
Topical Facet, with varying language for the concept (“weightlessness” vs. “zero gravity”). True semantic
interoperability and data reusability that would permit a user to find all data tagged with this concept require either
that all these concept instances be individually associated with the data, or use of a system that reliably maps all the
concepts from these ever-changing, ever-expanding set of ontologies. Even if such metadata normalizing mechanisms
are developed, their performance and value in generating “rich” metadata is dependent on the quality of input concepts
supplied either by original data submitters or biodata curators (typically employed by the system). The expertise that
submitters have is critical to shaping metadata that have value for many different kinds of audiences, and that allow
associated data to be found and reused. In the biomedical field, submitters to shared data repositories have relatively
low motivation to go to any great lengths to provide “rich metadata” (or assist biocurators in generating them). This
is likely due, at least in part, to the fact that only a small fraction of shared data appears to be cited in publication
references when they are reused.31 Without their input, niche repositories and data systems, like the GLDS, with
limited resources for acquiring (and maintaining) rich metadata that meet all the criteria above must constantly trade
the use of resources to acquire or generate rich metadata with those that could be used for other worthy goals.
The findability and interoperability principles, when implemented in data systems, support data integration functions
like multi-source data querying and retrieval. Principles F2, I1, I2, and R1.3 require the use of community-developed
metadata standards, formal languages for metadata representation, FAIR vocabularies, and qualified references to
other data. These principles are unfortunately not yet widely or fully implemented across biomedical data systems,
making it difficult for systems to develop functions that integrate data semantically. To illustrate this, we examine
our own experience developing the GLDS to provide federated search and retrieval of omics data from several data
sources. We sought to import metadata records from three open-access data systems into our own metadata warehouse:
GEO, MG-RAST, and the PRoteomics IDEntifications repository (PRIDE)5. Each of these systems defines metadata
for omics data sets differently, but none of them make these schemas available in a formal semantic language format
(such as RDF or OWL). Furthermore, there are no existing maps of any of the metadata schemas to each other. As
such, we resorted to manually creating semantic maps of these schemas for use in our system; queries generated via
the GLDS or its RESTful search API are executed against the mapped schema concepts, and matching records are
shown in a common object model representation (Figure 4). While this approach met our immediate goals of allowing
users to query several data sources using our system, it required a good deal of resources and domain expertise to
develop a schema mapping. Furthermore, maintaining this mapping over time as each of the data sources inevitably
change will require more of our limited resources. The research community should recognize the value of federated
system functions like the querying function that the GLDS offers, and urge all open access repositories and data
systems to make their metadata schemas available to all according to the aforementioned FAIR principles.



                                                          239
Figure 4. Federated Search of Omics Data in the GLDS. The RESTful search API result shows 65 records from
the four data sources searched (GLDS, GEO, PRIDE, and MG-RAST). Each records metadata is mapped using a
single schema for display in the GLDS (see Figure 1a).



                                                     References

1.   Giardine B, Riemer C, Hardison RC, Burhans R, Elnitski L, Shah P, et al. Galaxy: a platform for interactive large-
     scale genome analysis. Genome Res. 2005;15(10):1451-5.
2.   Arkin AP, Stevens RL, Cottingham RW, Maslov S, Henry CS, Dehal P, et al. The DOE Systems Biology
     Knowledgebase (KBase). bioRxiv. 2016.
3.   Goff SA, Vaughn M, McKay S, Lyons E, Stapleton AE, Gessler D, et al. The iPlant Collaborative:
     Cyberinfrastructure for Plant Biology. Front Plant Sci. 2011;2:34.
4.   Edgar R, Domrachev M, Lash AE. Gene Expression Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and hybridization array
     data repository. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002;30(1):207-10.
5.   Jones P, Cote RG, Martens L, Quinn AF, Taylor CF, Derache W, et al. PRIDE: a public repository of protein and
     peptide identifications for the proteomics community. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(Database issue):D659-63.




                                                         240
6.    Meyer F, Paarmann D, D'Souza M, Olson R, Glass EM, Kubal M, et al. The metagenomics RAST server – a
      public resource for the automatic phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC Bioinformatics.
      2008;9(1):386.
7.    Leinonen R, Akhtar R, Birney E, Bower L, Cerdeno-Tarraga A, Cheng Y, et al. The European Nucleotide
      Archive. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011;39(Database issue):D28-31.
8.    Haug K, Salek RM, Conesa P, Hastings J, de Matos P, Rijnbeek M, et al. MetaboLights--an open-access general-
      purpose repository for metabolomics studies and associated meta-data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(Database
      issue):D781-6.
9.    Motenko H, Neuhauser SB, O'Keefe M, Richardson JE. MouseMine: a new data warehouse for MGI. Mamm
      Genome. 2015;26(7-8):325-30.
10.   Stein L, Sternberg P, Durbin R, Thierry-Mieg J, Spieth J. WormBase: network access to the genome and biology
      of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;29(1):82-6.
11.   Arend D, Junker A, Scholz U, Schuler D, Wylie J, Lange M. PGP repository: a plant phenomics and genomics
      data publication infrastructure. Database (Oxford). 2016;2016.
12.   Leinonen R, Sugawara H, Shumway M. The sequence read archive. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011;39(Database
      issue):D19-21.
13.   Huala E, Dickerman AW, Garcia-Hernandez M, Weems D, Reiser L, LaFond F, et al. The Arabidopsis
      Information Resource (TAIR): a comprehensive database and web-based information retrieval, analysis, and
      visualization system for a model plant. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;29(1):102-5.
14.   FlyBase: the Drosophila database. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996;24(1):53-6.
15.   Joshi-Tope G, Gillespie M, Vastrik I, D'Eustachio P, Schmidt E, de Bono B, et al. Reactome: a knowledgebase
      of biological pathways. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005;33(Database issue):D428-32.
16.   Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M. KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
      Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999;27(1):29-34.
17.   Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, et al. Gene ontology: tool for the unification
      of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9.
18.   Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ, Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, et al. The FAIR Guiding Principles
      for scientific data management and stewardship. Sci Data. 2016;3:160018.
19.   Wilkinson MD, Sansone S-A, Schultes E, Doorn P, Bonino da Silva Santos LO, Dumontier M. A design
      framework and exemplar metrics for FAIRness. bioRxiv. 2017.
20.   Berrios D, Thompson T, Fogle H, Rask J, Coughlan J. GeneLab: NASA's Open Access, Collaborative Platform
      for Systems Biology and Space Medicine. Poster presented at: 2015 AMIA Annual Symposium; November 14-
      18; San Francisco, CA2015.
21.   Berrios D, Welch J, Fogle H, Skidmore M, Marcu O. GeneLab: NASA’s GeneLab: Phase I Results and Plans.
      Poster presented at: 2016 AMIA Annual Symposium; Chicago, IL2016.
22.   Beheshti A, Cekanaviciute E, Smith DJ, Costes SV. Global transcriptomic analysis suggests carbon dioxide as an
      environmental stressor in spaceflight: a systems biology GeneLab case study. Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):4191.
23.   FAIR Metrics ALL: GO FAIR Metrics Group; 2018 [updated January 11, 2018. Available from:
      https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1065973.
24.   McMurry JA, Juty N, Blomberg N, Burdett T, Conlin T, Conte N, et al. Identifiers for the 21st century: How to
      design, provision, and reuse persistent identifiers to maximize utility and impact of life science data. PLoS Biol.
      2017;15(6):e2001414.
25.   Starr J, Castro E, Crosas M, Dumontier M, Downs RR, Duerr R, et al. Achieving human and machine accessibility
      of cited data in scholarly publications. PeerJ Comput Sci. 2015;1.
26.   Boudry C, Chartron G. Availability of digital object identifiers in publications archived by PubMed.
      Scientometrics. 2017;110(3):1453-69.
27.   Neumann J, Brase J. DataCite and DOI names for research data. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2014;28(10):1035-
      41.
28.   Patel-Schneider PF, Hayes P, Horrocks I. OWL Web Ontology Language: Semantics and Abstract Syntax. W3C;
      2004.
29.   Peter A, Michael R. C, Nebojša T, Brad C, John C, Michael H, et al. Common Workflow Language, v1.02016.
30.   R1.1: (Meta)data are released with a clear and accessible data usage license: GO FAIR Initiative; [Available
      from: https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/r1-1-metadata-released-clear-accessible-data-usage-license/.
31.   Kratz JE, Strasser C. Researcher perspectives on publication and peer review of data. PLoS One.
      2015;10(2):e0117619.




                                                          241
