Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection, Neutrality: Data
Management Challenges in the Face of New Regulation

SERGE ABITEBOUL, Inria & Ecole Normale Supérieure, France
JULIA STOYANOVICH, New York University, USA

The data revolution continues to transform every sector of science, industry, and government. Due to the
incredible impact of data-driven technology on society, we are becoming increasingly aware of the imperative
to use data and algorithms responsibly—in accordance with laws and ethical norms. In this article, we discuss
three recent regulatory frameworks: the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the
New York City Automated Decisions Systems (ADS) Law, and the Net Neutrality principle, which aim to
protect the rights of individuals who are impacted by data collection and analysis. These frameworks are
prominent examples of a global trend: Governments are starting to recognize the need to regulate data-driven
algorithmic technology.
   Our goal in this article is to bring these regulatory frameworks to the attention of the data management
community and to underscore the technical challenges they raise and that we, as a community, are well-
equipped to address. The main takeaway of this article is that legal and ethical norms cannot be incorporated
into data-driven systems as an afterthought. Rather, we must think in terms of responsibility by design,
viewing it as a systems requirement.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Data management systems; • Social and professional topics
→ Computing / technology policy; Technology audits; • Applied computing → Law;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Transparency, fairness, data protection, neutrality, responsible data
science
ACM Reference format:
Serge Abiteboul and Julia Stoyanovich. 2019. Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection, Neutrality: Data Man-
agement Challenges in the Face of New Regulation. J. Data and Information Quality 11, 3, Article 15 (June
2019), 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3310231


1 INTRODUCTION
The data revolution continues to transform every sector of science, industry, and government. Due
to the incredible impact of data-driven technology on society, we are becoming increasingly aware
of the imperative to use data and algorithms responsibly—in accordance with laws and ethical

This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant No. 1741047, and by Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR) Grant Headwork.
Authors’ addresses: S. Abiteboul, Inria, ENS, Paris, Serge Abiteboul, Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et Au-
tomatique, École normale supérieure, PSL University, 75005 Paris, France; email: Serge.Abiteboul@inria.fr; J. Stoyanovich,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, 370 Jay Street,
Brooklyn, NY 11201 USA; email: stoyanovich@nyu.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
                                                                                                                                  15
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
1936-1955/2019/06-ART15 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3310231


                      ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
15:2                                                                              S. Abiteboul and J. Stoyanovich

norms. The goal of this article is to underscore the technical challenges raised by recent legal and
regulatory frameworks, which the data management community is well-equipped to address.
   We discuss three recent frameworks: the European Union’s General Data Protection Regula-
tion (GDPR) (The European Union 2016), the New York City Automated Decisions Systems (ADS)
Law (The New York City Council 2017), and the Net Neutrality principle. These frameworks are
prominent examples of a global trend: Governments are starting to recognize the need to regulate
data-driven algorithmic technology. The GDPR and the NYC ADS Law aim to protect the rights of
individuals who are impacted by data collection and analysis, while the Net Neutrality principle
ensures that services are being treated equitably. Yet, despite the focus on organizations, rights of
individuals also figure prominently in the neutrality debate: One of the imperatives is that indi-
viduals should be able to enjoy freedom of choice and expression on-line. We will give some legal
context on neutrality by discussing the EU Regulation 2015/2120 (The European Parliament AND
Council 2015), the Indian Net Neutrality Regulatory Framework (Government of India, Ministry
of Communications 2018), and the ongoing regulatory debate on Net Neutrality in the U.S.
   Our goal in this article is to bring these regulatory frameworks to the attention of the data man-
agement community. The main takeaway of this article is that legal norms cannot be incorporated
into data-driven systems as an afterthought. Rather, we must think in terms of responsibility by
design, viewing it as a systems requirement.
1.1 The General Data Protection Regulation
The European Union recently enacted a sweeping regulatory framework known as the General
Data Protection Regulation, or the GDPR (The European Union 2016). The regulation was adopted
in April 2016 and became enforceable about two years later, on May 25, 2018. The GDPR aims
to protect the rights and freedoms of natural persons with regard to how their personal data is
processed, moved, and exchanged (Article 1). The GDPR is broad in scope and applies to “the
processing of personal data wholly or partly by automated means” (Article 2), both in the private
sector and in the public sector. Personal data is broadly construed and refers to any information
relating to an identified or identifiable natural person, called the data subject (Article 4). In this
article, we focus on the following salient points of the regulation:
       • lawful processing of data is predicated on the data subject’s informed consent, stating
         whether their personal data can be used, and for what purpose (Articles 6, 7);
       • the data subject has a right to correct any errors in their data (“right to rectification,”
         Article 16), to withdraw their data from the system (“right to erasure,” Article 17), and to
         move data from one data processor to another (“right to portability,” Article 20);
       • the data subject has the right to be informed about the collection and use of their data.1
   The primary focus of the GDPR is on protecting the rights of data subjects, by giving them
insight into, and control over, the collection and processing of their personal data. Providing in-
sight, in response to the “right to be informed,” requires technical methods for algorithmic and
data transparency, which we will discuss in Section 2. We will also discuss the challenges inherent
in giving individuals an ability to erase or move their data in Section 4.
1.2     The New York City Algorithmic Decision Systems Law
New York City recently passed a law (The New York City Council 2017) requiring that a task
force be put in place to survey the current use of “automated decision systems” (ADS), defined
as “computerized implementations of algorithms, including those derived from machine learning
or other data processing or artificial intelligence techniques, which are used to make or assist in
1 https://gdpr-info.eu/issues/right-to-be-informed/.


ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection, Neutrality                                                               15:3

making decisions,” in City agencies. The task force is working to develop a set of recommendations
for enacting algorithmic transparency by the agencies, and will propose procedures for:
    • requesting and receiving an explanation of an algorithmic decision affecting an individual
      (Section 3(b));
    • interrogating automated decision systems for bias and discrimination against members of
      legally protected groups and addressing instances in which a person is harmed based on
      membership in such groups (Sections 3(c) and 3(d));
    • assessing how automated decision systems function and are used and archiving the systems
      together with the data they use (Sections 3(e) and 3(f)).
   In contrast to the GDPR, which is very broad in scope, the NYC ADS Law only regulates City
agencies in their use of algorithms and data, and does not directly apply to private companies.
However, because government agencies often procure systems and components from industry
partners, the Law will likely impact industry practices. Further, while New York is the first U.S.
city to pass a law of this kind, we expect other U.S. municipalities to follow with similar legal
frameworks or recommendations in the near future.
   The primary focus of the NYC ADS Law is on algorithmic transparency, which, in turn, cannot
be achieved without data transparency (Stoyanovich and Howe 2018). As we discussed in Sec-
tion 1.1, transparency is also an implicit requirement of the GDPR, stemming from the “right to
be informed.” We will discuss the role that the data management community can play in enabling
data transparency in Section 2.
   The NYC ADS Law further requires fair and equitable treatment of individuals, mandating that
ADS safeguard against bias and discrimination, and provide transparency in this regard. We will
discuss fairness in Section 3, and will propose some research directions for the data management
community that are complementary to the rich and rapidly expanding body of work on fairness
in machine learning.

1.3 The Net Neutrality Principle
Net Neutrality is the principle that Internet Service Providers (ISPs) should not discriminate or
charge differently based on the message source (the content provider), its destination (the user),
or its content. The concept was articulated in Wu (2003).
   According to Net Neutrality, an ISP cannot block or throttle video streams from YouTube (nega-
tive discrimination), or enable free access to Facebook out of package (a kind of positive discrimina-
tion). A September 2018 report from Northeastern University and the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, found that U.S. telecommunications companies are indeed slowing internet traffic to and
from those two sites in particular, along with other popular apps (Kharif 2018; Molavi Kakhki et al.
2015). Of course, there are limits to the non-discrimination, such as blocking pornographic mate-
rial for young Internet users, filtering hate speech in some countries, or guaranteeing quality for
emergency services.
   In the European Union, Net Neutrality is guaranteed by EU Regulation 2015/2120 (The Euro-
pean Parliament AND Council 2015), although different countries may interpret the regulation
differently. For example, some forms of zero-rating, the practice of providing Internet access with-
out financial cost as a means of positive discrimination, are legal in some EU countries but not
in others. Since 2018, India has perhaps the world’s strongest Net Neutrality rules (Government
of India, Ministry of Communications 2018). In general, more and more countries are adopting
Net Neutrality regulations, with a notable exception. In the United States, the Federal Communi-
cations Commission (FCC) issued its Open Internet Order in 2015, reclassifying Internet access—
previously classified as an information service—as a common carrier telecommunications service,

                  ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
15:4                                                                              S. Abiteboul and J. Stoyanovich

thereby enforcing some form of Net Neutrality. However, in 2017, under the chairmanship of Ajit
Pai, the FCC officially repealed Net Neutrality rules.

2 ALGORITHMIC AND DATA TRANSPARENCY
ProPublica’s story on “machine bias” in an algorithm used for sentencing defendants (Angwin
et al. 2016) amplified calls to make algorithms more transparent and accountable (Kroll et al. 2017).
Transparency and accountability are intrinsically linked with trust, and are of particular impor-
tance when algorithmic systems are integrated into government processes, assisting humans in
their decision-making tasks, and sometimes even replacing humans. Transparency of government
is a core democratic value, which compels us to develop technological solutions that both increase
government efficiency and can be made transparent to the public.
   A narrow interpretation of algorithmic transparency requires that the source code of a system be
made publicly available. This is a significant step toward transparency (as long as the posted code
is readable, well-documented and complete), but it is rarely sufficient. One of the reasons for this, of
particular relevance to the data management community, is that meaningful transparency of algo-
rithmic processes cannot be achieved without transparency of data (Stoyanovich and Howe 2018).
   What is data transparency, and how can we achieve it? One immediate interpretation of this
term in the context of predictive analytics includes “making the training and validation datasets
publicly available.” However, while data should be made open whenever possible, much of it is
sensitive and cannot be shared directly. That is, data transparency is in tension with the privacy of
individuals who are included in the dataset. In light of this, we may adopt the following alterna-
tive interpretation of data transparency: In addition to releasing training and validation datasets
whenever possible, vendors should make publicly available summaries of relevant statistical prop-
erties of the datasets that can aid in interpreting the decisions made using this data, while applying
state-of-the-art methods to preserve the privacy of individuals (such as differential privacy (Dwork
and Roth 2014)). When appropriate, privacy-preserving synthetic datasets can be released in lieu
of real datasets to expose certain features of the data (Ping et al. 2017).
   An important aspect of data transparency is interpretability—surfacing the statistical properties
of a dataset, the methodology that was used to produce it, and, ultimately, substantiating its “fitness
for use” in the context of a specific automated decision system or task. This consideration of a
specific use is particularly important, because datasets are increasingly used outside the original
context for which they were intended. The data management community can begin addressing
these challenges by building on the significant body of work on data profiling (see Abedjan et al.
(2017) for a recent tutorial), with an eye on the new legal requirements.
   Interpretability rests on making explicit the interactions between the program and the data on
which it acts. This property is important both when an automated decision system is interrogated
for systematic bias and discrimination and when it is asked to explain an algorithmic decision that
affects an individual. For example, suppose that a system scores and ranks individuals for access
to a service. If an individual enters her data and receives the result—say, a score of 42—then this
number alone provides no information about why she was scored in this way, how she compares to
others, and what she can do to potentially improve her outcome. A prominent example of a system
of this kind, which is both opaque and extremely impactful, is the FICO credit scoring system in
the U.S. (Citron and Pasquale 2014).
   The data management research community is well-positioned to contribute to developing new
methods for interpretability. These new contributions can naturally build on a rich body of work
on data provenance (see Herschel et al. (2017) for a recent survey), on recent work on explaining
classifiers (Ribeiro et al. 2016) and auditing black box models using causal framework (Datta et al.
2016), and on automatically generating “nutritional labels” for data and models (Yang et al. 2018).
ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection, Neutrality                                                                  15:5

3 FAIRNESS
We can all agree that algorithmic decision-making should be fair, even if we do not agree on the
definition of fairness. But isn’t this about algorithm design? Why is this a data problem? Indeed,
the machine-learning and data-mining research communities are actively working on methods
for enabling fairness of specific algorithms and their outputs, with a particular focus on classifi-
cation problems (see, for example, Dwork et al. (2012); Feldman et al. (2015); Friedler et al. (2016);
Hajian and Domingo-Ferrer (2013); Kamiran et al. (2013); Kleinberg et al. (2017); Romei and
Ruggieri (2014); and proceedings of the recently established ACM Conference on Fairness, Ac-
countability, and Transparency (ACM FAT*)2 ). While important, these approaches focus solely
on the final step in the data science lifecycle, and are thus limited by the assumption that input
datasets are clean and reliable.
   Data-driven algorithmic decision making usually requires multiple pre-processing stages to ad-
dress messy input and render it ready for analysis (Jagadish et al. 2014). This pre-processing, which
includes data cleaning, integration, querying, and ranking, is often the source of algorithmic bias
(Kirkpatrick 2017; Stoyanovich et al. 2017), and so reasoning about sources of bias, and mitigating
unfairness upstream from the final step of data analysis, is potentially more impactful.
   For example, much research goes into ensuring statistical parity—a requirement that the de-
mographics of those receiving a particular outcome (e.g., a positive or negative classification), are
identical to the demographics of the population as a whole. Suppose that the input to a binary
classifier contains 900 men and 100 women, but that it is known that women represent 50% of
the over-all population, and so achieving statistical parity amounts to enforcing a 50-50 gender
balance among the positively classified individuals. That is, all else being equal, a woman in the
input to the classifier is far more likely to receive a positive classification than a man. An alterna-
tive is to observe the following: If the input to the classifier was produced by a SQL query, and if
relaxing the query would make the input more balanced (e.g., 1,000 men and 500 women), then a
more effective way to mitigate the lack of statistical parity in the output of the classifier is to relax
the query upstream.
   It is easy to construct additional examples that show how bias may be introduced during data
cleaning, data integration, querying, and ranking—upstream from the final stage of data analy-
sis. Therefore, it is meaningful to detect and mitigate these effects in the data lifecycle stages in
which they occur. (See Mitchell et al. (2018) for a discussion of the definitions of “bias” and of the
corresponding assumptions made when defining fairness measures.)
   Members of the data management community who are interested in this topic may consider
a growing body of work on impossibility results, which show that different notions of fairness
cannot be enforced simultaneously, and so require explicit trade-offs (Chouldechova 2017; Friedler
et al. 2016; Kleinberg et al. 2017). These are not negative results, per se, nor are they surprising.
Fairness is a subjective, context-dependent and highly politicized concept; a global consensus on
what is fair is unlikely to emerge, in the context of algorithmic decision making or otherwise.
Think, for example, of the decade-long debate about the interplay between “disparate treatment”
and “disparate impact,” for which recent examples include by Ricci v. De Stefano3 and the ongoing
lawsuit regarding the use of race in Harvard University admissions.4 That being said, a productive
way to move forward in the data science context is to develop methods that can be instrumented
with different alternative fairness notions, and that can support principled and transparent trade-
offs between these notions.

2 https://www.fatconference.org/.
3 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ricci_v._DeStefano.
4 https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/13/us/harvard-affirmative-action-asian-students.html.



                     ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
15:6                                                                              S. Abiteboul and J. Stoyanovich

4 MOVING AND REMOVING PERSONAL DATA
4.1 The Right to Be Forgotten
The right to be forgotten is originally motivated by the desire of individuals to not be perpetually
stigmatized by something they did in the past. Under pressure from despicable social phenomena
such as revenge porn, it was turned recently into laws in 2006 in Argentina, and since then in the
European Union, as part of the GDPR. In particular, Article 17 of the GDPR states that data subjects
have the right to request erasure of their personal data, and that they can do so for a large number
of reasons.
   The passing of this law primarily resulted in a high number of requests to search engines to
dereference web pages. This turned out to be controversial for a number of reasons, including also
that the dereferencing by Google is very opaque, and that this company in effect acquired, against
its own will, a questionable power to adjudicate. Furthermore, as is advocated by Wikimedia among
others, the right to be forgotten sometimes conflicts with other rights such as the public’s right to
information.
   In addition to search engines, the right to be forgotten affects companies that keep personal
data. A prominent example is Facebook, where for many years it was impossible to delete data
that pertains to a user’s account. A user may close an account, then reopen it some time later and
find all her data as it was originally. It is now possible to request the deletion of all data pertaining
to an account from Facebook, however, the user has no proof that the deletion indeed occurred.
   An important technical issue, of clear relevance to the data management community, is that of
deletion of information in systems that are typically meant to accumulate data. This deletion must
be both permanent and deep, in the sense that its effects must propagate through data dependen-
cies. To start, it is difficult to guarantee that all copies of every piece of deleted data have actually
been deleted. Further, when some data is deleted, the remaining database may become inconsis-
tent, and may, for example, include dangling pointers. Additionally, production systems typically
do not include a strong provenance mechanism, and so they have no means of tracking the use of
an arbitrary data item (one to be deleted), and reasoning about the dependencies on that data item
in derived data products.
   Although much attention of the data management community has over the years been devoted
to tracking and reasoning about provenance, primarily in relational contexts and in workflows
(see Herschel et al. (2017) for a recent survey), there is still important work to be done on making
these methods both practically feasible, and sufficiently general to accommodate the current legal
requirements. An important direction that is, to the best of our knowledge, still unexplored, con-
cerns ascertaining the effects of a deletion on downstream processes that are not purely relational,
but include other kinds of data analysis tasks, like data mining or predictive analytics.
   Requests for deletion may also conflict with other laws such as requirements to keep certain
transaction data for some period of time, or with requirements for fault tolerance and recover-
ability. Should the deleted pieces of data also be erased from caches and backups? Requesting this
functionality gives immediate nightmares to systems engineers in charge of a production data
management system, with millions of lines of code and terabytes of legacy data. The likely an-
swer is: “this cannot be done; the only solution I see is redeveloping the system from scratch with
right-to-be-forgotten-by-design.” Understanding the impact of deletion requests on our ability to
offer guarantees on system resilience and performance, and developing appropriate primitives and
protocols for practical use, is another call to action for the data management community.

4.2    Interoperability and Portability
Article 20 of the GDPR, “Right to data portability,” stipulates a data subject’s right to receive her
personal data from a vendor, and to transfer her data to another vendor. The main goals of this
ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection, Neutrality                                                                 15:7

provision are both to keep the data subject informed about what data a vendor has about her, and to
prevent vendor lock-in. This enables a user who is unhappy with a service to leave for a competing
service that best serves her needs, without having to reconstruct her entire data history. This also
allows a user to select applications of her choice and have them cooperate, to her best advantage,
even if they come from different vendors.
    In response to data portability regulation, and to users’ concerns, Google, Twitter, Microsoft, and
Facebook teamed up in the Data Transfer Project that aims to facilitate content transfer between
applications. Of course, it is not an easy task for a company to provide a service that facilitates
the departure of its customers. This is why, in spite of commendable behavior of companies that
engage in the Data Transfer Project, it is the role of regulators to impose data portability and
interoperability requirements.
    Interoperability of database applications is an old topic. But one can imagine an unlimited num-
ber of possibilities, such as having a Whatsapp call talk to a Skype one. And it certainly acquires
a different flavor when we consider interoperating applications with billions of users and millions
of transactions per second.
    For data portability, it should be noted that the devil is in the detail. The export format should be
stable and structured to facilitate reuse. Also, which data can be exported is an issue. Obviously, it
includes all data that the user volunteered to the service. But should it also include data the vendor
gathered from the behavior of the user (e.g., the time the user is waking up in the morning)? Should
it include data the service inferred (e.g., what is the home address of the user, her job address)?
    Another issue with portability is the target system. A user may want to port her photos from
Service A to Service B. The issue is then for Service B to be able to incorporate as much data as
possible from Service A. Now, the user may want to integrate her photos in a personal information
system (Abiteboul et al. 2015). Such a system must be able to integrate information from a large
panel of domains. This brings us to the fields of data integration (Lenzerini 2002) and knowledge
representation.

5 NEUTRALITY
As already mentioned, Net Neutrality is now legally required in some countries. Yet, detecting
Net Neutrality violations to enforce the law is not an easy task. Indeed, simply measuring the
performance of Internet communications is not easy: measurement results may depend on the
location of the source, of the target, of the context (other applications competing for the same
bandwidth), and on other factors. Indeed, different measures provided for network traffic typically
diverge. The evaluation of Net Neutrality relying on such hard-to-obtain measures is a challeng-
ing research topic (Molavi Kakhki et al. 2015), which is primarily of interest to the networks and
Internet measurement communities, and less so to data management.
   But beyond Net Neutrality, new forms of neutrality are emerging such as device neutrality (Is my
smart-phone blocking certain apps and favoring others?), and platform neutrality (Is this particular
web service providing neutral recommendation?). For instance, app stores like Google Play and the
Apple App Store, tend to refuse to reference certain services, perhaps because they are competing
with the company’s own services. Research is needed to be able to verify these new facets of
neutrality. In particular, it is not easy to check whether a recommendation engine like Google
search or Booking is enforcing only transparent editorial policies, and whether, other than that,
their results are comprehensive, impartial and based solely on relevance. For example, it has been
observed that search engines tend to favor some “friendly” services over competitors.5


5 https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_vs._Google.



                    ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
15:8                                                                               S. Abiteboul and J. Stoyanovich

6 TAKEAWAYS
In this article, we discussed several recent regulatory frameworks that aim to protect the rights of
individuals, to ensure equitable treatment of services, and to bring transparency to data-driven
algorithmic processes in industry and in government. Our goal was to bring these regulatory
frameworks to the attention of the data management community and to underscore the technical
challenges they raise and that we, as a community, are well-equipped to address.
   An important takeaway of this article is that legal norms cannot be incorporated into data-driven
systems as an afterthought. Rather, we must think in terms of responsibility by design, viewing it
as a systems requirement.
   We also stress that enacting algorithmic and data transparency, fairness, data protection, and
neutrality will require a significant cultural shift. In making this shift, we must accept that the
objectives of “efficiency,” “accuracy,” and “utility” cannot be the primary goal, but that they must
be balanced with equitable treatment of members of historically disadvantaged groups, and with
accountability and transparency to individuals affected by algorithmic decisions and to the general
public.
   In this article, we focused on explicit regulation of industry stakeholders by government entities
(in the case of the GDPR and the Net Neutrality laws), and on government oversight (in the case
of the NYC ADS law). Another implicit regulatory mechanism can be achieved by empowering
users and user associations, by providing them with data literacy education and with precise in-
formation on how different products and services work. Better educated users can choose better
solutions, including more effective ways to protect their private data. Such users can also more
easily understand explanations provided to them by an algorithmic system. User associations can
help individuals make informed choices, and support them via class actions lawsuits in the case of
disputes.

REFERENCES
Ziawasch Abedjan, Lukasz Golab, and Felix Naumann. 2017. Data profiling: A tutorial. In Proceedings of the ACM Interna-
    tional Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD’17). 1747–1751. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3035918.3054772
Serge Abiteboul, Benjamin André, and Daniel Kaplan. 2015. Managing your digital life. Commun. ACM 58, 5 (Apr. 2015),
    32–35. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2670528
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. 2016. Machine bias: Risk assessments in criminal sen-
    tencing. ProPublica (May 2016). Retrieved from https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-
    in-criminal-sentencing.
Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism prediction instruments.
    Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.00056.
Danielle K. Citron and Frank A. Pasquale. 2014. The scored society: Due process for automated predictions. Washington
    Law Rev. 89 (2014). Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2376209.
Anupam Datta, Shayak Sen, and Yair Zick. 2016. Algorithmic transparency via quantitative input influence: Theory and
    experiments with learning systems. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP’16). 598–617. DOI:https://doi.org/
    10.1109/SP.2016.42
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard S. Zemel. 2012. Fairness through awareness.
    In Proceedings of the Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science. 214–226. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/
    2090236.2090255
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. 2014. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends Theoret. Comput.
    Sci. 9, 3–4 (2014), 211–407. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1561/0400000042
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A. Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2015. Certifying
    and removing disparate impact. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
    and Data Mining. 259–268. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2783311
Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2016. On the (im)possibility of fairness. Retrieved
    from http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.07236.
Government of India, Ministry of Communications. 2018. DoT Letter on Net Neutrality Regulatory Framework dated
    31-07-2018. Retrieved from http://www.dot.gov.in/net-neutrality.

ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
Transparency, Fairness, Data Protection, Neutrality                                                                    15:9

Sara Hajian and Josep Domingo-Ferrer. 2013. A methodology for direct and indirect discrimination prevention in data
    mining. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 25, 7 (2013), 1445–1459. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2012.72
Melanie Herschel, Ralf Diestelkämper, and Houssem Ben Lahmar. 2017. A survey on provenance: What for? What form?
    What from? VLDB J. 26, 6 (2017), 881–906. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00778-017-0486-1
H. V. Jagadish, Johannes Gehrke, Alexandros Labrinidis, Yannis Papakonstantinou, Jignesh M. Patel, Raghu Ramakrishnan,
    and Cyrus Shahabi. 2014. Big data and its technical challenges. Commun. ACM 57, 7 (2014), 86–94. DOI:https://doi.org/
    10.1145/2611567
Faisal Kamiran, Indre Zliobaite, and Toon Calders. 2013. Quantifying explainable discrimination and removing illegal
    discrimination in automated decision making. Knowl. Info. Syst. 35, 3 (2013), 613–644. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s10115-012-0584-8
Olga Kharif. September 2018. YouTube, Netflix videos found to be slowed by wireless carriers. Bloomberg (Sept. 2018).
    Retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-09-04/youtube-and-netflix-throttled-by-carriers-
    research-finds.
Keith Kirkpatrick. 2017. It’s not the algorithm, it’s the data. Commun. ACM 60, 2 (Jan. 2017), 21–23. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
    1145/3022181
Jon M. Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2017. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determination of
    risk scores. In Proceedings of the 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS’17). 43:1–43:23. DOI:
    https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2017.43
Joshua A. Kroll, Joanna Huey, Solon Barocas, Edward W. Felten, Joel R. Reidenberg, David G. Robinson, and Harlan Yu.
    2017. Accountable algorithms. Univ. Penn. Law Rev. 165 (2017). Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
    abstract_id=2765268.
Maurizio Lenzerini. 2002. Data integration: A theoretical perspective. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-
    SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems (PODS’02). ACM, New York, NY, 233–246. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
    1145/543613.543644
Shira Mitchell, Eric Potash, and Solon Barocas. 2018. Prediction-based decisions and fairness: A catalogue of choices, as-
    sumptions, and definitions. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07867.
Arash Molavi Kakhki, Abbas Razaghpanah, Anke Li, Hyungjoon Koo, Rajesh Golani, David Choffnes, Phillipa Gill, and
    Alan Mislove. 2015. Identifying traffic differentiation in mobile networks. In Proceedings of the Internet Measurement
    Conference (IMC’15). ACM, New York, NY, 239–251. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2815675.2815691
Haoyue Ping, Julia Stoyanovich, and Bill Howe. 2017. DataSynthesizer: Privacy-preserving synthetic datasets. In Pro-
    ceedings of the 29th International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database Management. 42:1–42:5. DOI:
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3085504.3091117
Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. “Why should I trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any
    classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
    1135–1144. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939778
Andrea Romei and Salvatore Ruggieri. 2014. A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis. Knowl. Eng. Rev. 29, 5
    (2014), 582–638. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269888913000039
Julia Stoyanovich and Bill Howe. 2018. Follow the data! Algorithmic transparency starts with data transparency. Re-
    trieved from https://ai.shorensteincenter.org/ideas/2018/11/26/follow-the-data-algorithmic-transparency-starts-with-
    data-transparency.
Julia Stoyanovich, Bill Howe, Serge Abiteboul, Gerome Miklau, Arnaud Sahuguet, and Gerhard Weikum. 2017. Fides: To-
    wards a platform for responsible data science. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Scientific and Sta-
    tistical Database Management. 26:1–26:6. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3085504.3085530
The European Parliament and Council. 2015. Regulation (EU) 2015/2120. Retrieved from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
    legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32015R2120.
The European Union. 2016. Regulation (EU) 2016/679: General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Retrieved from https://
    gdpr-info.eu/.
The New York City Council. 2017. Int. No. 1696-A: A Local Law in relation to automated decision systems used by agencies.
    Retrieved from https://laws.council.nyc.gov/legislation/int-1696-2017/.
Tim Wu. 2003. Network neutrality, broadband discrimination. J. Telecommun. High Technol. Law 2 (2003).
Ke Yang, Julia Stoyanovich, Abolfazl Asudeh, Bill Howe, H. V. Jagadish, and Gerome Miklau. 2018. A nutritional label for
    rankings. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD’18). 1773–1776. DOI:https://
    doi.org/10.1145/3183713.3193568

Received December 2018; accepted December 2018




                      ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, Vol. 11, No. 3, Article 15. Publication date: June 2019.
