arXiv:2106.14072v1 [cs.IR] 26 Jun 2021

1

This is a pre-print version of the chapter published in Advances in Bias and
Fairness in Information Retrieval (BIAS 2021). The final authenticated version
is available online at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78818-6 5.
To cite this chapter:
Makhortykh M., Urman A., and Ulloa R. (2021) Detecting Race and Gender
Bias in Visual Representation of AI on Web Search Engines. In L. Boratto, S. Faralli, M. Marras, and G. Stilo (Eds.), Advances in Bias and Fairness in Information
Retrieval (pp. 36-50). Springer. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78818-6 5.

Detecting race and gender bias in visual
representation of AI on web search engines
Mykola Makhortykh1, Aleksandra Urman1,2 , and Roberto Ulloa3
1

University of Bern, Switzerland
University of Zurich, Switzerland
GESIS - Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Cologne, Germany
2

3

Abstract. Web search engines influence perception of social reality by
filtering and ranking information. However, their outputs are often subjected to bias that can lead to skewed representation of subjects such as
professional occupations or gender. In our paper, we use a mixed-method
approach to investigate presence of race and gender bias in representation of artificial intelligence (AI) in image search results coming from
six different search engines. Our findings show that search engines prioritize anthropomorphic images of AI that portray it as white, whereas
non-white images of AI are present only in non-Western search engines.
By contrast, gender representation of AI is more diverse and less skewed
towards a specific gender that can be attributed to higher awareness
about gender bias in search outputs. Our observations indicate both the
the need and the possibility for addressing bias in representation of societally relevant subjects, such as technological innovation, and emphasize
the importance of designing new approaches for detecting bias in information retrieval systems.
Keywords: web search · bias · artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

Web search engines are important information intermediaries that help users
navigate through web content. By filtering and ranking information in response
to user queries, search engines determine what users learn about specific topics
or entities [32] in turn influencing individual and collective perception of social
reality [22]. However, search engine outputs can be biased - that is systematically
skewed towards particular individuals or groups [21] - which may lead to the
distorted perception of the search subject and potentially result in negative
societal effects such as racial or gender discrimination.
A growing number of studies discusses how search engines perpetuate biases
related to gender and race, in particular in image search results [30, 38, 40].
Because of their affective and interpretative potential [12], images can be effective
means of educating the public about complex social phenomena, such as gender
or race, but also of reiterating stereotypes [30]. With image search being used for
a broad range of purposes, varying from educators preparing teaching materials

Visual representation of AI in web search

3

[36] to media professionals producing new content [41], its biased outputs can
reinforce skewed representation, in particular of already vulnerable groups, and
amplify discrimination [38].
Currently, research on race and gender bias in image search focuses on visual
representation of a few subjects, such as professional occupations [30] or emotions [41]. However, there is a growing recognition that representation of other
aspects of contemporary societies can also be genderly or racially skewed. One of
such aspects is technological innovation, the representation of which in the West
historically tended to be decontextualized and often associated with masculinity
[11] and whiteness [29]. Such biases can further aggravate existing inequalities by
influencing hiring decisions (e.g., by stereotyping a certain field as racially homogeneous) and positioning the technologies, predominantly portrayed as White,
above marginalised non-white people [14]. Biases found to be present in web
search outputs (e.g., [38, 30]) have the potential to influence public opinion and
perceptions of the social reality [19, 32]. This is further aggravated by the fact
that users tend to trust the output of search engines [44]
Besides expanding the current focus of search bias research to new areas, it
is also important to consider the consequences of recent studies on search engine
auditing for evaluating the robustness of bias measurements. Firstly, while the
effect of personalization on the variability of search outputs is shown to be minor
[50, 49], the influence of randomization (e.g., result reshuffling for maximizing
user engagement) can be more significant [35] and is yet to be accounted for in
the context of bias research. Second, despite substantial differences in content selection across search engines [28, 51, 35], the majority of existing research focuses
on individual search engines (e.g., Google[30] or Bing[41]), whereas possible bias
variation between different engines (including the ones prevalent in non-Western
context, such as Yandex or Baidu) remains understudied.
In this paper, we aim to make two contributions. First, we introduce a mixedmethod approach for detecting race and gender bias in image search outputs that
takes into consideration potential effects of randomization and personalization.
Second, we apply this method for conducting a cross-engine comparison of bias
in the visual representation of artificial intelligence (AI). Our choice of a case
study is attributed to common criticism of AI representation being racially and
genderly skewed both in popular culture and industry [46, 4] and the recent
claims about Google amplifying these biases via its image search results [46, 14].

2

Related work: race and gender bias in image search

The possibility that outputs of web search engines can be systematically skewed
towards certain gender and racial groups is increasingly recognized both by the
broad public and information retrieval (IR) community [41]. Race and gender
biases are found in different IR systems associated with search engines, including
text search results [43, 38] and search autocompletion [8, 13]. However, image
search is particularly relevant in this context, because of high interpretative and

4

Makhortykh et al.

affective potential of visual information [12, 34] that makes it a potent means of
challenging, but also forming stereotypes.
Despite the growing recognition of the problem, there are still relatively few
studies which look at biases in image search outputs in a systematic way. To
study the prevalence of gender bias, Kay et al. [30] collected the US Bureau of
Labor and Statistics data on gender distribution per occupation and compared it
with results of Google image search for the respective occupations. Their findings
indicate that Google image search outputs tend to exaggerate gender biases in
relation to occupations viewed as male- or female-dominated. Otterbacher et
al. [40] used Bing image search API to extract results for ”person” query and
then classified them using Clarifai. Their findings indicate that male images
occur more commonly than female ones for gender-neutral queries; furthermore,
search results tend to present males as more competent and purpose-oriented.
Even less research was done on racial bias in image search outputs. Using
a selection of racialized and gendered web search queries (e.g., “black girls”),
Noble [38] employed qualitative content analysis to identify multiple cases when
Google promoted racist and misogynistic representation of women and minority
groups. Araujo et al. [6] used feature extraction to compare outputs from Google
and Bing image search APIs for “ugly woman” and “beautiful woman” queries
and found that images of black women were more often identified as “ugly”,
whereas white women were positively stereotyped.

3

Case study: Racial and gender representation of AI

The ongoing recognition of the complex relationship between technical (e.g.,
algorithms) and social (e.g., race) constructs has substantial implications for
how modern technology is perceived. In the case of AI, which can be broadly
defined as the ability of human-made artifacts to engage in intellectual behavior
[37], this connection is particularly strong. Its strength is attributed both to
conceptual reasons, such the bilateral relationship between intellectual behavior
and social norms/activities [17], and the increasing adoption of AI for the tasks
dealing with societal matters (e.g., predictive policing [20]).
The tendency to anthropomorphize AI - that is to present it in a human-like
form either physically or digitally [14, 33] - further problematizes its relationship with social constructs. There are multiple theories explaining the historical
tendency to integrate anthropomorphic features in product design [16], but generally anthropomorphism is an important factor in making complex technology
more familiar and comfortable to use. However, anthropomorphism also stimulates application of social categories (e.g., race or gender) to the non-human
entities, such as AI, and it has substantial implications both to their perception
and representation [9].
The racial representation of AI in the Western Anglophone culture is characterized by whiteness both in terms of physical appearance and behavior. Cave
and Dihal [14] list multiple cultural products in which AI is presented as exclusively white (Terminator, Blade Runner, I, Robot to name a few). While the

Visual representation of AI in web search

5

portrayal of AI in recent cultural products slowly becomes more diverse (e.g.,
Westworld and Humans), it is still predominantly treated as white.
Similar to popular culture, the historical and institutional context of AI industry in the West is argued to be related to whiteness [29]. Besides multiple
other consequences, it affects how AI is imagined and represented as indicated
by the prevalent use of white materials and surfaces for constructing robots [46]
and the reliance on sociolinguistic markers associated with whiteness (e.g., by
omitting dialects related to non-white groups when developing conversational
agents [14].
In contrast to the limited variety of its racial representation, the gender representation of AI is more diverse (albeit still quite binary). In the case of popular
culture, there are multiple instances of portraying AI as male and female entities.
The number of fictitious representations of AI as female (Metropolis, Her, Ghost
in the Shell, Ex Machina) might be even higher than the number of male ones
(A.I., I, Robot, Prometheus). At the same time, many of these representations
portray female AI just as servants to their (usually male) masters, who often
treat AI as a means of satisfying their (sexual) needs [4].
A similar relationship between AI and gender can be observed in the industry, where the most well-known AI-based assistants (e.g., Cortana or Siri) have
female features. While the industrial treatment of gender aspects of AI does not
necessarily rely on its intense sexualization as much as popular culture, it still
iterates the notion of women being subordinate to men and intended to be used
by their masters [5].

4

Methodology

To collect data, we utilized a set of virtual agents - that is software simulating user browsing behavior (e.g., scrolling web pages and entering queries) and
recording its outputs. The benefits of this approach, which extends algorithmic
auditing methodology introduced by Haim et al. [24], is that it allows controlling
for personalization [25] and randomization [35] factors influencing outputs of web
search. In contrast to human actors, virtual agents can be easily synchronized
(i.e., to isolate the effect of time at which the search actions are conducted) and
deployed in a controlled environment (e.g., a network of virtual machines using
the same IP range, the same type of operating system (OS) and the same browsing software) to limit the effects of personalization that might lead to skewed
outputs.
In addition to controlling for personalization, agent-based auditing allows
addressing randomization of web search that is caused by search engines testing
different ways of ranking results to identify their optimal ordering for a query
(e.g., the so-called “Google Dance” [10]). Such randomization leads to a situation, when identical queries entered under the same conditions can result in
different sets of outputs (or their different ranking), thus making the observations
non-robust. One way of addressing this issue is to deploy multiple virtual agents
that simultaneously enter the same search query to determine randomization-

6

Makhortykh et al.

caused variation in the sets of outputs that can then be merged into a single,
more complete set.
For the current study, we built a network of 100 CentOS virtual machines
based in the Frankfurt region of Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2). On
each machine, we deployed 2 virtual agents (one in Chrome browser and one in
Mozilla Firefox browser), thus providing us with 200 agents overall. Each agent
was made of two browser extensions: a tracker and a bot. The tracker collected
the HTML and the metadata of all pages visited in the browser and immediately
sent it to a storage server. The bot emulated a sequence of browsing actions that
consisted of (1) visiting an image search engine page, (2) entering the “artificial
intelligence” query, and (3) scrolling down the search result page to load at least
50 images.
Before starting the emulation, the browsers were cleaned to prevent the search
history affecting the search outputs. While there is a possibility that search engines infer the gender of the agent based on the previous IP behavior (i.e., the
use of the IP by other AWS users before it was assigned to a virtual agent deployed as part of our experiment), we expect that the use of multiple agents shall
counter this potential limitation, because it is unlikely that the large number of
randomly assigned IPs will be associated with one specific gender.
The study was conducted on February 27, 2020. We distributed 200 agents
between the world’s six most popular search engines by market share: Google,
Bing, Yahoo, Baidu, Yandex, and DuckDuckGo (DDG) [47]. For all engines, the
”.com” version of the image search engine was used (e.g., google.com). The agents
were equally distributed between the engines; however, because of technical issues (e.g., bot detection mechanisms), some agents did not manage to complete
their routine. The overall number of agents per engine which completed the full
simulation routine and returned the search results was the following: Baidu (29),
Bing (30), DDG (34), Google (33), Yahoo (31), and Yandex (21).
For our analysis, we extracted from collected HTML links related to top
30 image search results for each agent. Then, we divided these links into three
subgroups: 1) results from 1 to 10; 2) results from 11 to 20; and 3) results from
21 to 30. Such a division allowed us to investigate differences in terms of race
and gender bias between top results (i.e., 1-10), which are usually the only ones
viewed by the users [42], and later results. Then, we aggregated all images for
each subgroup per engine to account for possible randomization of search outputs
on individual agent level, and removed duplicate images. The number of unique
images in each subgroup per each engine is shown in Table 1; the numbers do
not include images which were not accessible anymore (e.g., because of being
removed from the original websites).
To detect race and gender bias in search outputs, we relied on their manual coding. While some earlier studies (e.g., [40]) use image recognition for
extracting image features, its applicability for bias detection has been questioned recently [45] considering the possibility of recognition approaches being
biased themselves. Hence, we used two coders to classify all the collected images
based on categories listed below. To measure intercorder reliability, we calcu-

Visual representation of AI in web search

7

Table 1. The number of unique images per each result subgroup per engine

Baidu
Results 1:10 10
Results 11:20 12
Results 21:30 12

Bing
16
10
10

DuckDuckGo Google
11
11
11
16
10
13

Yahoo
13
15
16

Yandex
12
14
15

lated Kripperndorf’s alpha values that showed an acceptable level of reliability:
0.73 (antropomorphism), 0.69 (race), 0.67 (sex). Following the reliability assessment, the identified disagreements were resolved by the original coders using
consensus-coding.
Anthropomorphism: We determined whether the image of AI includes any anthropomorphic elements, such as human(-like) figures or parts of human bodies.
Depending on their exact appearance, such elements can indicate what humanlike features are attributed to AI and how its developers and users are portrayed.
Most importantly, this category determines the subset of images which can be
subjected to gender and race bias, because both forms of bias are primarily
applicable to anthropomorphic portrayals of AI.
Race: For anthropomorphized images, we identified the race of the portrayed
entity to determine whether there is racial skew in AI representation. Following
Cave and Dihal [14], we treat racialized representation in broad terms and interpret the coloring of AI elements as a form of racial attribution. Hence, both
a white-skinned individual and a human-like android made of white material
can be treated as White. The options included 1) white, 2) non-white, 3) mixed
(when both white and non-white entities were present), 4) abstract (when an
entity can not be attributed to any human race), and 5) unknown (when it was
not possible to reliably detect race).
We acknowledge that treating race as a binary (white/non-white) category is
a simplification as the complex notion that ignores multiple nuances, in particular different categories of non-white population (e.g., Black, Hispanic or Asian).
However, numerous recent explorations of the role of race in the societal hierarchies as well as media-driven racial bias use the same white/non-white dichotomy
[18, 27, 31, 26], in part to avoid shifting the focus from the uniqueness of white
privilege compared with various degrees of marginalization of non-white population. The same logic can be applied to the study of technological innovation, in
particular in the context of AI, which has been historically related to whiteness
[29]. Furthermore, it is difficult to identify different sub-categories of non-white
population using only visual cues, considering the complex notion of race and
the fact that is not necessarily based on one’s appearance only. Because of these
reasons, we believe that in the context of the present study, the binary categorization of race is suitable despite its limitations.
Sex: For anthropomorphized images, we determined the sex of the entity
portrayed to determine whether there is a gendered skew. We used sex as a proxy
for gendered representation because of the complexity of the notion of gender.
Unlike sex, which is a binary concept, gender encompasses a broad variety of

8

Makhortykh et al.

social and cultural identities that makes it hard to detect based on visual cues.
Hence, we opted out for a more robust option that is still sufficient for evaluating
gender-related aspects of AI representation. The possible options included 1)
male, 2) female, 3) mixed (when both male and female entities were present), 4)
abstract (when an entity was shown as sexless), and 5) unknown (when it was
not possible to reliably detect sex).

5
5.1

Findings
AI and antropomorphism

Unlike Kay et al. [30], who had data on gender distribution for occupations to
compare their representation in image search outputs, we do not have a clear
baseline for AI representation. Hence, we follow Otterbacher et al. [40] and treat
the unequal retrievability - that is the accessibility of outputs with specific characteristics [48] - as an indicator of bias in search outputs. By systematically
prioritizing images with specific features (e.g., the ones showing males and not
females; [40]), the system creates a skewed perception of the phenomenon represented via its outputs.

Fig. 1. Ratio of anthropomorphic representations of AI per result set for each engine
(1-10 refers to results 1 to 10; 11-20 to results 11 to 20; 21-30 to results 21 to 30).

The first sign of the skewed representation of AI by search engines is the
tendency for its anthropomorphization (Fig.1). The proportion of images showing AI not as an anthropomorphized entity constitutes less than 10% for most
engines with a single exception coming from Baidu, the largest Chinese search
engine. On Google and Yandex, all images appearing in the top 10 results show
AI as a human-like entity. For other Western engines, the proportion of anthropomorphized AI images increased after the first 10 results, and in some cases
(Bing, DDG) also reached 100% for the second and the third sets of outputs.

Visual representation of AI in web search

9

The anthropomorphized representations of AI usually take one of two forms:
a schematic representation of a human brain or a human-like figure made of
different materials (e.g., metal, plastic, or pixels). The way of presenting AI as
“shiny humanoid robots” [33] can be attributed to it being the most recognizable
way of presenting it in Western popular culture. However, by reiterating humanlike AI images, search engines also create more possibilities for bias compared
with more schematic or non-anthropomorphized representations.

5.2

AI and race

Our analysis showed that non-racialized portrayals of AI are prevalent on Western search engines (Fig.2). With the exception of Bing, where racialized images
prevail among the first 10 results, Western engines tend to put more abstract images (e.g., schematic brain images or bluish human figures) on the top of search
results, whereas later sets of outputs become more skewed towards specific racial
representations. However, a different pattern is observed on non-Western engines,
where racialized images of AI appear on the top of search results and become
less visible in the later outputs.

Fig. 2. Proportion of racialized representations of AI among anthropomorphized images (1-10 refers to results 1 to 10; 11-20 to results 11 to 20; 21-30 to results 21 to
30).

10

Makhortykh et al.

In those cases, when AI images have a racial component, it is almost always
associated with whiteness, thus supporting earlier claims about a skewed racial
portrayal of AI on search engines [14, 46]. The most common form such an
association takes is the stylization of human-like entities representing AI with
white materials and Caucasian face features. In some cases, it is supplemented
with images of humans or part of their bodies (e.g., arms) representing developers
or users of AI, most of whom are again shown as white. While the proportion of
such racialized images in top 10 results for Western search engines is relatively
low, their presence still promotes “White utopian imaginary” [14] of AI and
enforces racial homogeneity in relation to it.
Such a skewed representation is amplified by an almost complete absence of
non-white entities in image search results. Their absence is particularly striking
for Western search engines, where the only form of racial diversity available are
images of body parts that can not be easily related to a particular race (e.g.,
an arm the color of which can not be easily detected because of the way the
image is lit). This exclusive focus on whiteness can be treated as a form of
symbolic erasure of non-white groups not only from AI industry, but also the
larger context of its use that encompasses most of contemporary societies [14].
Surprisingly, the non-Western engines, which prioritize images accentuating
AI whiteness more than the Western ones, are also the only ones to include nonwhite or mixed AI portrayals. With the exception of two images showing AI as
a black- or brown-skinned entity, these images show non-white AI developers or
users. Such discrepancy leads to a situation, where the use of AI is contextualized
by adding non-white contexts, but the core interpretation of AI as a ”technology
of whiteness” [29] is not challenged.
5.3

AI and gender

Similarly to racial representation, we observed the prevalence of non-gendered
portrayals of AI. The tendency for not attributing specific sex features to it was
even more pronounced than in the case of race, where the proportion of abstract
representations was lower. Just as in the case of race, the majority of Western
search engines (except Bing) prioritized gender-neutral images among the top
10 results with more gendered images appearing for lower results. The opposite
pattern was again observed for Yandex (but not Baidu) and Bing, where the top
10 results contained more gendered images than the later ones.
In the case of gendered images of AI, we did not observe that much of a
discrepancy between different groups as in the case of racialized ones. With the
exception of Bing, Western search engines included in the top 10 results images
based on which it was not possible to clearly identify the entity’s sex (e.g., human
arms which could belong both to males and females). Later sets of results also
included images presenting AI as female entities, but their proportion rarely
exceeded 10% of search outputs.
As in the case of racialized images, non-Western engines provided more diverse representations of AI, including both female and male entities as well as the

Visual representation of AI in web search

11

Fig. 3. Proportion of gendered representations of AI among anthropomorphized images
(1-10 refers to results 1 to 10; 11-20 to results 11 to 20; 21-30 to results 21 to 30).

mix of two. Unlike Western engines, where images of AI as a male entity were almost absent, both Baidu and Yandex prioritized more masculine representation
of AI. Such effect was achieved by highlighting images of both male developers and users as well as human-like robots with masculine facial features. One
possible explanation of non-Western engines promoting a masculine portrayal
of AI can be its different representation in popular culture. At least in the case
of Russia, where Yandex originates from, a number of prominent cultural products present AI as a masculine entity (e.g., The Adventures of Electronic, Far
Rainbow, Guest from the Future), whereas feminine representations are rather
few.
While the aforementioned observation can be treated as evidence that search
engine outputs depend on popular culture representations of AI, we did not observe any overly sexualized images of female AI despite its intense sexualization
in Western popular culture. This finding indicates that cultural embeddedness
of bias does not necessarily translate into its visibility in search outputs and can
be attributed to more active countering of gender bias in the recent years [38].

6

Discussion

Our observations indicate that visual representation of AI on the world’s most
popular search engines is skewed in some racial and, to a lesser degree, gender

12

Makhortykh et al.

aspects. While it is not sufficient to claim that search mechanisms used to retrieve information about AI are racially or genderly biased, our findings support
earlier research [40] that found search engines reiterating social biases. In the
case of AI, it results in predominantly white portrayal of the technology and the
omittance of non-white AI designs as well as non-white developers and users.
By offering rather skewed selection of visual information, search engines misrepresent important developments in the field of AI and erase the presence of
non-white groups that can be viewed as a form of discrimination.
Similar to other forms of web bias [7], the white-centric representation of AI
on search engines can be explained by multiple factors. Because of its prevalence
in Western Anglophone popular culture and industry, representation of AI as
White commonly appears on ”authoritative” websites, such as the ones related
to government and research institutions and mainstream media. Outputs from
these websites are prioritized both because they are treated as more reliable
sources of information [23] and because they often have the large number of
backlinks, a feature which is important for website ranking on the majority
of search engines [2] (Yandex, however, is a notable exception with its larger
emphasis not on backlinking, but on user engagement [1]).
Additional factor which contributes to racial bias in AI representation is the
fact that image search outputs are often based on text accompanying the image,
but not on the image features [15, 3]. Under these circumstances, the search
algorithm is not necessarily able to differentiate between white and non-white
representations of AI. Instead, it just retrieves images which are accompanied by
certain text from the websites, the ranking of which is determined using the same
criteria as text search results. Considering that racial bias in AI representation
remains mainstream [14] as contrasted by gender bias (e.g., it is harder to imagine
academic or government websites hosting images of sexualized AI), it results in
the iteration of white-centric representations, in particular by Western search
engines.
The reliance on textual cues for generating image search outputs and enginespecific ranking signals (e.g., number of backlinks and source type) can also explain differences in AI representation between Western and non-Western search
engines. Unlike Western engines, where the selection of ranking signals is similar and results in reiteration of the same set of images stressing the whiteness
of AI, the focus on the specific regions (i.e., China for Baidu and Russia for
Yandex) together with substantial differences in ranking mechanisms (e.g., prioritization of backlinks coming from China for Baidu [2] and the reliance on
different ranking signals for Yandex [1]) leads to the inclusion of more non-white
representations of technology. However, if this explanation is valid, then in order to be able to deal with racial bias in a consistent manner, search engines
would need either to more actively engage with actual image features (and not
just text accompanying images) or expand the selection of websites prioritized
for retrieving image outputs beyond currently prioritized mainstream Western
websites, where white-centered AI representations are prevalent.

Visual representation of AI in web search

13

Overall, racial bias in the way web search mechanisms treat visual representation of AI can hardly be viewed as something that search engines invent
on their own. However, they do reinforce the bias by creating a vicious cycle
in which images of AI as ”technology of whiteness” [29] appear on the top of
search results and are more likely to be utilized by users, including educators or
media practitioners. However, this reinforcement loop can be broken as shown
by the substantially less biased representation of AI in terms of gender: despite
the strong tendency for its femalization and subsequent sexualization in popular
culture, we found relatively few gendered images of AI in the top results and
none of them was sexualized.
Together with the earlier cases of addressing skewed web search outputs
that were identified by the researchers (e.g., racialized gender bias [38]), our
observations support the argument of Otterbacher [39] about the importance
of designing new approaches for detecting bias in IR systems. In order to be
addressed, bias has first to be reliably identified, but so far there is only a few
IR studies that investigate the problem in a systematic way. By applying a
new approach to examine bias in the context of AI, our paper highlights the
importance of conducting further research to achieve better understanding of
how significant are racial and gender biases in search outputs in relation to
different aspects of contemporary societies, including (but not limited to) other
forms of innovation.
It is also important to note several limitations of the research we conducted.
First, we used very simple binary classification schematas both for race and
gender features of AI portrayal. Second, our observations rely on a snapshot
experiment conducted at a certain point of time, so it does not account for
possible fluidity of image search results. Third, the experimental setup (i.e.,
the choice of the query and the infrastructure location) can also influence the
observations produced.

References
1. 9
SEO
Tips
on
How
to
Optimize
for
Yandex,
https://www.link-assistant.com/news/yandex-seo.html
2. Search
Engine
Differences:
Google,
Bing,
Yandex
&
More,
https://www.deepcrawl.com/knowledge/technical-seo-library/search-engine-differences/
3. Yandex
—
Technologies
—
Computer
vision.
How
it
works,
https://yandex.com/company/technologies/vision/
4. Adams, R.: Helen A’Loy and other tales of female automata: a gendered reading of
the narratives of hopes and fears of intelligent machines and artificial intelligence.
AI & Society 35(3), 569–579 (2020)
5. Adams, R., Loideáin, N.N.: Addressing indirect discrimination and gender stereotypes in ai virtual personal assistants: the role of international human rights law.
Cambridge International Law Journal 8(2), 241–257 (2019)
6. Araújo, C.S., Meira, W., Almeida, V.: Identifying stereotypes in the online perception of physical attractiveness. In: International Conference on Social Informatics.
pp. 419–437. Springer (2016)

14

Makhortykh et al.

7. Baeza-Yates, R.: Bias on the web. Communications of the ACM 61(6), 54–61
(2018)
8. Baker, P., Potts, A.: ‘Why do white people have thin lips?’ Google and the perpetuation of stereotypes via auto-complete search forms. Critical Discourse Studies
10(2), 187–204 (2013)
9. Bartneck, C., Yogeeswaran, K., Ser, Q.M., Woodward, G., Sparrow, R., Wang, S.,
Eyssel, F.: Robots And Racism. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. pp. 196–204. ACM (2018)
10. Battelle, J.: The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business
and Transformed Our Culture. Hachette UK (2011)
11. Blake, M.K., Hanson, S.: Rethinking Innovation: Context and Gender. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 37(4), 681–701 (2005)
12. Bleiker, R.: Visual Global Politics. Routledge (2018)
13. Bonart, M., Samokhina, A., Heisenberg, G., Schaer, P.: An investigation of biases
in web search engine query suggestions. Online Information Review 44(2), 365–381
(2019)
14. Cave, S., Dihal, K.: The Whiteness of AI. Philosophy & Technology 33(4), 685–703
(2020)
15. Cui, J., Wen, F., Tang, X.: Real time google and live image search re-ranking. In:
Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on Multimedia. pp. 729–732
(2008)
16. DiSalvo, C., Gemperle, F.: From seduction to fulfillment: the use of anthropomorphic form in design. In: Proceedings of the 2003 international conference on
Designing pleasurable products and interfaces. pp. 67–72. ACM (2003)
17. Doise, W., Mugny, G., James, A.S., Emler, N., Mackie, D.: The social development
of the intellect, vol. 10. Elsevier (2013)
18. Eddo-Lodge, R.: Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race.
Bloomsbury Publishing (2020)
19. Epstein, R., Robertson, R.E.: The search engine manipulation effect (SEME) and
its possible impact on the outcomes of elections. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 112(33), E4512–E4521 (2015)
20. Eubanks, V.: Automating inequality: How high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor. St. Martin’s Press (2018)
21. Friedman, B., Nissenbaum, H.: Bias in computer systems. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems 14(3), 330–347 (1996)
22. Gillespie, T.: The Relevance of Algorithms. In: Gillespie, T., Boczkowski, P.J.,
Foot, K.A. (eds.) Media Technologies, pp. 167–194. The MIT Press (2014)
23. Grind, K., Schechner, S., McMillan, R., West, J.: How google interferes with its
search algorithms and changes your results. The Wall Street Journal 15 (2019)
24. Haim, M., Arendt, F., Scherr, S.: Abyss or Shelter? On the Relevance of Web Search
Engines’ Search Results When People Google for Suicide. Health Communication
32(2), 253–258 (2017)
25. Hannak, A., Sapiezynski, P., Molavi Kakhki, A., Krishnamurthy, B., Lazer, D.,
Mislove, A., Wilson, C.: Measuring personalization of web search. In: Proceedings
of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web. pp. 527–538. ACM (2013)
26. Heider, D.: White News: Why Local News Programs Don’t Cover People of Color.
Routledge (2014)
27. Hübinette, T., Tigervall, C.: To be Non-white in a Colour-Blind Society: Conversations with Adoptees and Adoptive Parents in Sweden on Everyday Racism. Journal
of Intercultural Studies 30(4), 335–353 (2009)

Visual representation of AI in web search

15

28. Jiang, M.: The business and politics of search engines: A comparative study of
Baidu and Google’s search results of Internet events in China. New Media & Society
16(2), 212–233 (2014)
29. Katz, Y.: Artificial Whiteness: Politics and Ideology in Artificial Intelligence.
Columbia University Press (2020)
30. Kay, M., Matuszek, C., Munson, S.A.: Unequal Representation and Gender Stereotypes in Image Search Results for Occupations. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 3819–3828. ACM (2015)
31. Kivel, P.: Uprooting Racism - 4th Edition: How White People Can Work for Racial
Justice. New Society Publishers (2017)
32. Kulshrestha, J., Eslami, M., Messias, J., Zafar, M.B., Ghosh, S., Gummadi, K.P.,
Karahalios, K.: Search bias quantification: investigating political bias in social media and web search. Information Retrieval Journal 22(1), 188–227 (2019)
33. Leufer, D.: Why We Need to Bust Some Myths about AI. Patterns 1(7) (2020),
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7660373/
34. Makhortykh, M., González Aguilar, J.M.: Memory, politics and emotions: internet
memes and protests in venezuela and ukraine. Continuum 34(3), 342–362 (2020)
35. Makhortykh, M., Urman, A., Ulloa, R.: How search engines disseminate information about COVID-19 and why they should do better. Harvard Kennedy School
Misinformation Review 1 (2020)
36. Müller, H., Despont-Gros, C., Hersh, W., Jensen, J., Lovis, C., Geissbuhler, A.:
Health care professionals’ image use and search behaviour. Proceedings of Medical
Informatics Europe (MIE 2006), Maastricht, Netherlands pp. 24–32 (2006)
37. Nilsson, N.J.: Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. (1998)
38. Noble, S.U.: Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism. New
York University Press (2018)
39. Otterbacher, J.: Addressing social bias in information retrieval. In: International
Conference of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum for European Languages. pp.
121–127. Springer (2018)
40. Otterbacher, J., Bates, J., Clough, P.: Competent Men and Warm Women: Gender
Stereotypes and Backlash in Image Search Results. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 6620–6631. ACM (2017)
41. Otterbacher, J., Checco, A., Demartini, G., Clough, P.: Investigating User Perception of Gender Bias in Image Search: The Role of Sexism. In: The 41st International Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval. pp.
933–936. ACM (2018)
42. Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Joachims, T., Lorigo, L., Gay, G., Granka, L.: In Google
We Trust: Users’ Decisions on Rank, Position, and Relevance. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication 12(3), 801–823 (2007)
43. Pradel, F.: Biased Representation of Politicians in Google and Wikipedia Search?
The Joint Effect of Party Identity, Gender Identity and Elections. Political Communication 0(0), 1–32 (2020)
44. Schultheiß, S., Sünkler, S., Lewandowski, D.: We still trust in google, but less
than 10 years ago: an eye-tracking study. Information Research: An International
Electronic Journal 23(3), 1–13 (2018)
45. Schwemmer, C., Knight, C., Bello-Pardo, E.D., Oklobdzija, S., Schoonvelde, M.,
Lockhart, J.W.: Diagnosing Gender Bias in Image Recognition Systems. Socius 6,
1–17 (2020)
46. Sparrow, R.: Do robots have race?: Race, social construction, and HRI. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Magazine 27(3), 144–150 (2020)

16

Makhortykh et al.

47. Statcounter:
Search
Engine
Market
Share
Worldwide
(2020),
https://gs.statcounter.com/search-engine-market-share
48. Traub, M.C., Samar, T., van Ossenbruggen, J., He, J., de Vries, A., Hardman,
L.: Querylog-based Assessment of Retrievability Bias in a Large Newspaper Corpus. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM/IEEE-CS on Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries. pp. 7–16. ACM (2016)
49. Trielli, D., Diakopoulos, N.: Partisan search behavior and Google results in the
2018 U.S. midterm elections. Information, Communication & Society 0(0), 1–17
(2020)
50. Unkel, J., Haim, M.: Googling Politics: Parties, Sources, and Issue Ownerships on
Google in the 2017 German Federal Election Campaign. Social Science Computer
Review pp. 1–20 (2019)
51. Urman, A., Makhortykh, M., Ulloa, R.: Auditing source diversity bias in video
search results using virtual agents. In: Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. pp. 232–236 (2021)

