Santa Clara University School of Law
Legal Studies Research Paper Series
Research Paper No. 06-08
Marquette Law School
Legal Studies Research Paper Series
Research Paper No. 06-20

Search Engine Bias and the Demise of
Search Engine Utopianism

Eric Goldman
Marquette Law School; Santa Clara University – School of Law

This paper can be downloaded without charge from the
Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection at:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=893892

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS
AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM
ERIC GOLDMAN*

ABSTRACT
Due to search engines’ automated operations, people often
assume that search engines display search results neutrally
and without bias. However, this perception is mistaken.
Like any other media company, search engines affirmatively
control their users’ experiences, which has the consequence
of skewing search results (a phenomenon called “search
engine bias”). Some commentators believe that search
engine bias is a defect requiring legislative correction.
Instead, this Essay argues that search engine bias is the
beneficial consequence of search engines optimizing content
for their users. The Essay further argues that the most
problematic aspect of search engine bias, the “winner-takeall” effect caused by top placement in search results, will be
mooted by emerging personalized search technology.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. SEARCH ENGINES MAKE EDITORIAL CHOICES ...................................112
A. INDEXING...........................................................................................113
B. RANKING ...........................................................................................114
II. SEARCH ENGINE EDITORIAL CHOICES CREATE BIASES ....................115
III. SEARCH ENGINE BIAS IS NECESSARY AND DESIRABLE .....................118
IV. TECHNOLOGICAL EVOLUTION WILL MOOT SEARCH ENGINE BIAS 121
V. CONCLUSION .........................................................................................122

*

Assistant Professor, Marquette University Law School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Home
page: http://www.ericgoldman.org. Email: egoldman@gmail.com. I appreciate the
comments of participants at the Yale Law School Regulating Search Symposium and the
2005 Association of Internet Researchers (AoIR) Annual Meeting in Chicago.

111

YALE JOURNAL OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY

SPRING 2006

In the past few years, search engines have emerged as a major force
in our information economy, helping searchers perform hundreds of
millions (or even billions) of searches per day.1 With this broad reach,
search engines have significant power to shape searcher behavior and
perceptions. In turn, the choices that search engines make about how to
collect and present data can have significant social implications.
Typically, search engines automate their core operations, including
the processes that search engines use to aggregate their databases and then
sort/rank the data for presentation to searchers. This automation gives
search engines a veneer of objectivity and credibility.2 Machines, not
humans, appear to make the crucial judgments, creating the impression that
search engines bypass the structural biases and skewed data presentations
inherent in any human-edited media.3
Unfortunately, this romanticized view of search engines does not
match reality. Search engines are media companies. Like other media
companies, search engines make editorial choices designed to satisfy their
audience.4 These choices systematically favor certain types of content over
others, producing a phenomenon called “search engine bias.”
Search engine bias sounds scary, but this Essay explains why such
bias is both necessary and desirable. The Essay also explains how emerging
personalization technology will soon ameliorate many concerns about
search engine bias.
I. SEARCH ENGINES MAKE EDITORIAL CHOICES
Search engines frequently claim that their core operations are
completely automated and free from human intervention,5 but this
1

In 2003, search engines performed over a half-billion searches a day. See Danny
Sullivan, Searches Per Day, Search Engine Watch, Feb. 25, 2003,
http://searchenginewatch.com/reports/article.php/2156461.
2
See Jason Lee Miller, Left, Right, or Center? Can a Search Engine Be Biased?,
WebProNews.com, May 10, 2005,
http://www.webpronews.com/insidesearch/insidesearch/wpn-5620050510LeftRightorCenterCanaSearchEngineBeBiased.html.
3
There is a broad perception that search engines present search results passively and
neutrally. See Leslie Marable, False Oracles: Consumer Reaction to Learning the Truth
About How Search Engines Work, June 30,
2003,http://www.consumerwebwatch.org/dynamic/search-report-false-oraclesabstract.cfm; Maureen O’Rourke, Defining the Limits of Free-Riding in Cyberspace:
Trademark Liability for Metatagging, 33 GONZ. L. REV. 277 (1998).
4
See, e.g., C. EDWIN BAKER, ADVERTISING AND A DEMOCRATIC PRESS (1994).
5
See, e.g., Does Google Ever Manipulate Its Search Results?, Google.com,
http://www.google.com/support/bin/answer.py?answer=4115&topic=368 (“The order and
contents of Google search results are completely automated. No one hand picks a particular
result for a given search query, nor does Google ever insert jokes or send messages by
changing the order of results.”); Does Google Censor Search Results?, Google.com,
http://www.google.com/support/bin/answer.py?answer=17795&topic=368 (“Google does

112

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM
characterization is false. Instead, humans make numerous editorial
judgments about what data to collect and how to present that data.
A. INDEXING
Search engines do not index every scrap of data available on the
Internet. Search engines omit (deliberately or accidentally) some web pages
entirely6 or may incorporate only part of a web page.7
During indexing, search engines are designed to associate third party
“metadata” (data about data) with the indexed web page. For example,
search engines may use and display third party descriptions of the website
in the search results.8 Search engines may also index “anchor text” (the text
that third parties use in hyperlinking to a website),9 which can cause a
website to appear in search results for a term the website never used (and
may object to).10

not censor results for any search terms. The order and content of our results are completely
automated; we do not manipulate our search results by hand.”); Technology Overview,
Google.com, http://www.google.com/corporate/tech.html (“There is no human
involvement or manipulation of results….”); see also Complaint at ¶¶ 37-38, 52-56,
KinderStart.com LLC v. Google, Inc., Case No. C 06-2057 RS (N.D. Cal. Mar. 17, 2006)
(giving other examples of Google’s claims to be passive). Note that Google has
subsequently revised some of these cited pages after its censorship controversy in China.
6
See Judit Bar-Ilan, Expectations Versus Reality – Search Engine Features Needed for
Web Research at Mid-2005, 9 CYBERMETRICS 2 (2005),
http://www.cindoc.csic.es/cybermetrics/articles/v9i1p2.html.
7
For example, many search engines ignore metatags. See Eric Goldman, Deregulating
Relevancy in Internet Trademark Law, 54 EMORY L.J. 507, 567-68 (2005). Search engines
also incorporate only portions of very large files. See Bar-Ilan, supra note 6; Why Doesn't
My Site Have a Cached Copy or a Description?, Google.com,
http://www.google.com/support/bin/answer.py?answer=515&topic=365 (describing how
some pages are “partially indexed”); Has Google Dropped Their 101K Cache Limit?,
ResearchBuzz!, Jan. 31, 2005,
http://www.researchbuzz.org/2005/01/has_google_dropped_their_101k.shtml (discussing
how historically Google indexed only the first 101k of a document).
8
See My Site’s Listing Is Incorrect and I Need it Changed, Google.com,
http://www.google.com/webmasters/3.html . Google’s automated descriptions have
spawned at least one lawsuit by a web publisher who believed the compilation created a
false characterization. See Seth Fineberg, Calif. CPA Sues Google Over “Misleading”
Search Results, ACCT. TODAY, Apr. 19, 2004, at 5, available at
http://www.webcpa.com/article.cfm?articleid=193&pg-acctoday&print=yes
9
See Jagdeep S. Pannu, Anchor Text Optimization, WebProNews.com, Apr. 8, 2004,
http://www.webpronews.com/ebusiness/seo/wpn-420040408AnchorTextOptimization.html.
10
For example, the first search result in Google and Yahoo! for the keyword “miserable
failure” is President George W. Bush’s home page because so many websites have linked
to the biography using the term “miserable failure.” See Tom McNichol, Your Message
Here, N.Y. TIMES, Jan. 22, 2004, at G1. This algorithmic vulnerability has spawned a
phenomenon called “Google bombing,” where websites coordinate an anchor text attack to

113

YALE JOURNAL OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY

SPRING 2006

Finally, once indexed, search engines may choose to exclude web
pages from their indexes for a variety of reasons, ranging from violations of
quasi-objective search engine technical requirements11 to simple
capriciousness.12
B. RANKING
To determine the order of search results, search engines use complex
proprietary “ranking algorithms.” Ranking algorithms obviate the need for
humans to make individualized ranking decisions for the millions of search
terms used by searchers, but they do not lessen the role of human editorial
judgment in the process. Instead, the choice of which factors to include in
the ranking algorithm, and how to weight them, reflects the search engine
operator’s editorial judgments about what makes content valuable. Indeed,
to ensure that these judgments are produce desired results, search engines
manually inspect search results13 and make adjustments accordingly.
Additionally, search engines claim they do not modify
algorithmically-generated search results, but there is some evidence to the
contrary. Search engines allegedly make manual adjustments of a web
publisher’s overall ranking,14 and search engines occasionally modify
search results presented in response to particular keyword searches.15
intentionally distort search results. See John Hiler, Google Time Bomb, MICROCONTENT
NEWS, Mar. 3, 2002, http://www.microcontentnews.com/articles/googlebombs.htm.
11
See, e.g., Stefanie Olsen, Search Engines Delete Adware Company, CNET NEWS.COM,
May 13, 2004, http://news.com.com/2102-1024_3-5212479.html?tag=st.util.print (Google
and Yahoo kicked WhenU.com out of their indexes for allegedly displaying different web
pages to searchers and search engine robots, a process called “cloaking”).
12
This is the heart of KinderStart’s allegations against Google. See Complaint,
KinderStart.com LLC v. Google, Inc., Case No. C 06-2057 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 17, 2006).
Although the complaint’s allegations about Google’s core algorithmic search may not be
proven, Google does liberally excise sources from Google News. For example, Google
claims that “news sources are selected without regard to political viewpoint or ideology,”
see Google News (Beta), Google.com,
http://news.google.com/intl/en_us/about_google_news.html#25 , but Google dropped a
white supremacist news source from Google News because it allegedly promulgated “hate
content.” See Susan Kuchinskas, Google Axes Hate News, INTERNETNEWS.COM, Mar. 23,
2005, http://www.internetnews.com/xSP/article.php/3492361.
13
See Posting of Eric Goldman to Technology & Marketing Law Blog, Google’s Human
Algorithm, http://blog.ericgoldman.org/archives/2005/06/googles_human_a.htm (June 5,
2005, 14:11 EST) (Google hires students to manually review search results for quality
purposes).
14
See Search King, Inc. v. Google Tech., Inc., No. CIV-02-1457-M, at 4 (W.D. Okla. Jan.
13, 2003) (“Google knowingly and intentionally decreased the PageRanks assigned to both
SearchKing and PRAN.”). This manual adjustment has also been alleged in the recent
KinderStart lawsuit. See Complaint, KinderStart.com L.L.C. v. Google, Inc., Case No. C
06-2057 RS (N.D. Cal. Mar. 17, 2006).
15
See MSN Blockades phpBB Searchers, TRIMMAIL’S EMAIL BATTLES, Jan. 18, 2006,
http://www.emailbattles.com/archive/battles/vuln_aacgfbgdcb_jd/ (some search engines

114

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM

Conclusion
Search engines have some duality in their self-perceptions, and this
duality creates a lot of confusion. Search engines perceive themselves as
objective and neutral because they let automated technology do most of the
hard work. However, in practice, search engines make editorial judgments
just like any other media company. Principally, these editorial judgments
are instantiated in the parameters set for the automated operations, but
search engines also make individualized judgments about what data to
collect and how to present it. These manual interventions may be the
exception and not the rule, but these exceptions only reinforce that search
engines play an active role in shaping their users’ experiences when
necessary to accomplish their editorial goals.
II. SEARCH ENGINE EDITORIAL CHOICES CREATE BIASES
Search results ordering has a significant effect on searchers and web
publishers. Searchers usually consider only the top few search results; the
top-ranked search result gets a high percentage of searcher clicks, and
clickthrough rates quickly decline from there.16 Therefore, even if a search
blocked certain search terms containing the keyword “phpBB”). Other examples of search
engines manually adjusting algorithmically-generated results:
 In response to the search term “Jew,” for a period of time (including, at minimum
November 2005 when the author observed the phenomenon), Google displayed a
special result in the sponsored link, saying “Offensive Search Results: We're
disturbed about these results as well. Please read our note here.” The link led to a
page explaining the results (see http://www.google.com/explanation.html).
 Amazon’s book search functionality offered the prompt “did you mean adoption?”
in response to searches for the keyword “abortion.” When pointed out to
Amazon, it manually changed the database to disable that prompt. See Laurie J.
Flynn, Amazon Says Technology, Not Ideology, Skewed Results, N.Y. TIMES, Mar.
20, 2006, at B8.
 Google removed some websites from its index in response to a 512(c)(3) takedown demand from the Church of Scientology. However, Google displayed the
following legend at the bottom of affected search results pages (such as search
results for “scientology site:xenu.net”): “In response to a complaint we received
under the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act, we have removed 2 result(s)
from this page. If you wish, you may read the DMCA complaint that caused the
removal(s) at ChillingEffects.org.” See
http://www.google.com/search?sourceid=navclient&ie=UTF8&rls=GGLD,GGLD:2005-09,GGLD:en&q=scientology+site%3Axenu%2Enet
(go to google.com, enter “scientology.site.xenu.net”, then click search and scroll
to the bottom of the page); see also Chris Sherman, Google Makes Scientology
Infringement Demand Public, SEARCH ENGINE WATCH, Apr. 15, 2002,
http://searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/2159691.
16
See Jakob Nielsen, The Power of Defaults, JAKOB NIELSEN’S ALERTBOX, Sept. 26, 2005,
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/defaults.html (citing a study by Cornell professor Thorsten

115

YALE JOURNAL OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY

SPRING 2006

engine delivers hundreds or even thousands of search results in response to
a searcher’s query, searchers effectively ignore the vast majority of those
search results. Accordingly, web publishers desperately want to be listed
among the top few search results.17
For search engines, results placement determines how the searcher
perceives the search experience. If the top few search results do not satisfy
the searcher’s objectives, the searcher may deem the search a failure.
Therefore, to maximize searcher perceptions of search success, search
engines generally tune their ranking algorithms to support majority
interests.18 In turn, minority interests (and the websites catering to them)
often receive marginal exposure in search results.
To gauge majority interests, search engines frequently include a
popularity metric in their ranking algorithm. Google’s popularity metric,
PageRank, treats inbound links to a website as popularity votes, but votes
are not counted equally; links from more popular websites count more than
links from lesser-known websites.19
Beyond promoting search results designed to satisfy majority
interests, PageRank’s non-egalitarian voting structure causes search results
to be biased towards websites with economic power20 because these
websites get lots of links due to their marketing expenditures and general
prominence.
Indeed, popularity-based ranking algorithms may reinforce and
perpetuate existing power structures.21 Websites that are part of the current
power elite get better search result placement, which leads to greater
Joachims that the first search result gets 42% of clicks and the second search result gets
8%; further, when the first two search results are switched, the first search result gets
34%—meaning that positioning dictated searcher behavior); Nico Brooks, The Atlas Rank
Report: How Search Engine Rank Impacts Traffic, ATLAS INSTITUTE DIGITAL MARKETING
INSIGHTS, June 2004, http://app.atlasonepoint.com/pdf/AtlasRankReport.pdf (the first
ranked search result may get ten times the quantity of clicks as the tenth ranked search
result).
17
See Michael Totty & Mylene Mangalindan, Web Sites Try Everything To Climb Google
Rankings, WALL ST. J. ONLINE, Feb. 26, 2003,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1046226160884963943.html?emailf=yes
18
See Lucas D. Introna & Helen Nissenbaum, Shaping the Web: Why the Politics of Search
Engines Matters, INFO. SOC’Y, July-Sept. 2000, at 169.
19
See Our Search: Google Technology, Google.com, http://www.google.com/technology/.
20
See Niva Elkin-Koren, Let the Crawlers Crawl: On Virtual Gatekeepers and the Right to
Exclude Indexing, 26 U. DAYTON L. REV. 179, 188 (2001); Frank Pasquale, Rankings,
Reductionism, and Responsibility, Seton Hall Public Law Research Paper No. 888327, at
25, Feb. 25, 2006, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=888327,; Trystan
Upstill et al., Predicting Fame and Fortune: PageRank or Indegree?, PROC. OF THE 8TH
AUSTRALASIAN DOCUMENT COMPUTING SYMP., Dec. 15, 2003,
http://research.microsoft.com/users/nickcr/pubs/upstill_adcs03.pdf (showing that
BusinessWeek Top Brand, Fortune 500 and Fortune Most Admired companies get
disproportionately high PageRank).
21
See Introna & Nissenbaum, supra note 18.

116

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM
consideration of their messages and views. Furthermore, the increased
exposure attributable to better placement means that these websites are
likely to get more votes in the future, leading to a self-reinforcing process.22
In contrast, minority-interest and disenfranchised websites may have a
difficult time cracking through the popularity contest, potentially leaving
them perpetually relegated to the search results hinterlands.23
A number of commentators have lamented these effects and offered
some proposals in response:
1. Improve Search Engine Transparency
Search engines keep their ranking algorithms secret.24 This secrecy
hinders search engine spammers from gaining more prominence than search
engines want them to have, but the secrecy also prevents searchers and
commentators from accurately assessing any bias. To enlighten searchers,
search engines could be required to disclose more about their practices and
their algorithms.25 This additional information has two putative benefits.
First, it may improve market mechanisms by helping searchers choose
among search engine competitors. Second, it may help searchers determine
the appropriate level of cognitive authority to assign to their search results.
2. Publicly Fund Search Engines
Arguably, search engines have “public good”-like attributes, such as
reducing the social costs of search behavior. If so, private actors will not
incorporate these social benefits into their decision-making. In that case,
public funding of search engines may be required to produce socially

22

See Egalitarian Engines, ECONOMIST, Nov. 17, 2005 (“there is a widespread belief
among computer, social and political scientists that search engines create a vicious circle
that amplifies the dominance of established and already popular websites”); see also
Junghoo Cho & Sourashis Roy, Impact of Search Engines on Page Popularity, WWW
2004, May 2004, http://oak.cs.ucla.edu/~cho/papers/cho-bias.pdf; Upstill, supra note 20.
But see Santo Fortunato et al., The Egalitarian Effect of Search Engines, Nov. 2005,
http://arxiv.org/pdf/cs.CY/0511005 (questioning the consequences of the “rich-gets-richer”
effect).
23
See Cho & Roy, supra note 22.
24
See Search King Inc. v. Google Tech., Inc., No. CIV-02-1457-M, at 3 n.2 (W.D. Okla.
Jan. 13, 2003) (“Google’s mathematical algorithm is a trade secret, and it has been
characterized by the company as ‘one of Google’s most valuable assets.’”); Stefanie Olsen,
Project Searches for Open-Source Niche, CNET NEWS.COM, Aug. 18, 2003,
http://news.com.com/2102-1032_3-5064913.html?tag=st_util_print.
25
See Introna & Nissenbaum, supra note 18.

117

YALE JOURNAL OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY

SPRING 2006

optimal search results.26 Indeed, there have been several proposals to create
government-funded search engines.27
3. Mandate Changes to Ranking/Sorting Practices
Search engines could be forced to increase the exposure of
otherwise-marginalized websites. At least two lawsuits (the Search King
and KinderStart lawsuits against Google) have sought this result.28 In
addition, some academics support mandatory reordering of search results.
For example, Pandey et al. advocate a “randomized rank promotion”
scheme where obscure websites randomly should get extra credit in ranking
algorithms, appearing higher in the search results on occasion and getting
additional exposure to searchers accordingly.29 As another example,
Pasquale proposes that, when people think the search engines are providing
false or misleading information, search engines should be forced to include
a link to corrective information.30
III. SEARCH ENGINE BIAS IS NECESSARY AND DESIRABLE
Before trying to solve the problem of search engine bias, we should
be clear how search engine bias creates a problem that requires correction.
From my perspective, search engine bias is the unavoidable consequence of
search engines exercising editorial control over their databases. Like any
other media company, search engines simply cannot passively and neutrally
redistribute third party content (in this case, web publisher content). If a
search engine does not attempt to organize web content, its system quickly
26

See id.; Eszter Hargittai, Open Portals or Closed Gates? Channeling Content on the
World Wide Web, 27 P OETICS 233 (2000); cf. CASS SUNSTEIN, REPUBLIC.COM 170-72
(2001) (advocating publicly funded “deliberative domains”).
27
See Kevin J. O’Brien, Europeans Weigh Plan on Google Challenge, INT’L HERALD
TRIB., Jan. 18, 2006 (discussing a European initiative called Quaero, which is intended to
break the American hegemony implicit in Google’s dominant market position); Graeme
Wearden, Japan May Create Its Own Search Engine, CNET News.com, Dec. 21, 2005,
http://news.com.com/Japan+may+create+its+own+search+engine/2100-1025_36004037.html.
28
As Google said in its response to the KinderStart lawsuit, “Plaintiff KinderStart contends
that the judiciary should have the final say over [search engines’] editorial process. It has
brought this litigation in the hopes that the Court will second-guess Google’s search
rankings and order Google to view KinderStart’s site more favorably.” Motion to Dismiss
at 1, KinderStart.com LLC v. Google, Inc., No. C 06-2057 RS (N.D. Cal. May 2, 2006).
29
See Sandeep Pandey et al., Shuffling a Stacked Deck: the Case for Partially Randomized
Ranking of Search Engine Results,
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~olston/publications/randomRanking.pdf; cf. SUNSTEIN, supra note
26 (explaining that websites should be forced to link to contrary views as a way of
increasing exposure to alternative viewpoints).
30
See Pasquale, supra note 20, at 28-30 (proposing that the link be displayed as an asterisk
to the search results).

118

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM
and inevitably will be overtaken by spammers, fraudsters and malcontents.31
At that point, the search engine become worthless to searchers.
To prevent anarchy and preserve credibility, search engines
unavoidably must exercise some editorial control over their systems. In
turn, this editorial control will create some bias.
Fortunately, market forces limit the scope of search engine bias.
Searchers have high expectations for search engines: they expect search
engines to read their minds32 and infer their intent based solely on a small
number of search keywords.33 Search engines that disappoint (either by
failing to deliver relevant results, or by burying relevant results under too
many unhelpful results) are accountable to fickle searchers.34 There are

31

Every Internet venue accepting user-submitted content inevitably gets attacked by
unwanted content. If left untended, the venue inexorably degrades into anarchy. See, e.g.,
Alorie Gilbert, Google Fixes Glitch That Unleashed Flood of Porn, CNET News.com,
Nov. 28, 2005, http://news.com.com/2102-1025_3-5969799.html?tag=st.util.print
(describing how Google Base, a venue for user-submitted content, was overtaken by
pornographers: “the amount of adult content on Google Base was staggering considering
Google only launched the tool a week ago.”); Josh Quittner, The War Between alt.tasteless
and rec.pets.cats, WIRED, May 1994, at 46 (describing how a group of anarchists, for fun,
took over a USENET newsgroup about pets).
32
See Our Philosophy, Google.com, http://www.google.com/corporate/tenthings.html
(“The perfect search engine…would understand exactly what you mean and give back
exactly what you want.”); Chris Sherman, If Search Engines Could Read Your Mind,
SEARCH ENGINE WATCH, May 11, 2005,
http://searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/3503931.
33
Searchers routinely use a very small number of keywords to express their search
interests. See iProspect.com, Inc., iProspect Natural SEO Keyword Length Study, Nov.
2004, http://www.iprospect.com/premiumPDFs/keyword_length_study.pdf (eighty-eight
percent of search engine referrals are based on only one or two keywords); see also Declan
Butler, Souped-Up Search Engines, NATURE, May 11, 2000, at 112, 115 (citing an NEC
Research Institute study showing that up to 70% of searchers use only a single keyword as
a search term); Bernard J. Jansen et al., Real Life Information Retrieval: A Study of User
Queries on the Web, 32 SIGIR FORUM 5, 15 (1998) (stating that the average keyword
length was 2.35 words; one-third of searches used one keyword and 80% used three
keywords or fewer); Jakob Nielsen, JAKOB NIELSEN’S ALERTBOX, Search: Visible and
Simple, May 13, 2001, http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20010513.html (stating that the
average keyword length was 2.0 words).
34
See Kim Peterson, Microsoft Learns to Crawl, SEATTLE TIMES, May 2, 2005 (MSN
Search “learned that the arcane searches were the make-or-break moments for Web
searchers. People weren't just happy when a search engine could find answers to their most
bizarre, obscure and difficult queries. They would switch loyalties.”); Bob Tedeschi, Every
Click You Make, They’ll Be Watching You, N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 3, 2006,
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/03/business/03ecom.html?ei=5090&en=9e55ae64f69243
3a&ex=1301716800&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss&pagewanted=print.

119

YALE JOURNAL OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY

SPRING 2006

multiple search engines available to searchers,35 and few barriers to
switching between them.36
As a result, searchers will shop around if they do not get the results
they want,37 and this competitive pressure constrains search engine bias. If
a search engine’s bias degrades the relevancy of search results, searchers
will explore alternatives even if searchers do not realize that the results are
biased. Meanwhile, search engine proliferation means that niche search
engines can segment the market and cater to underserved minority
interests.38 Admittedly, these market forces are incomplete—searchers may
never consider what results they are not seeing—but they are powerful
nonetheless.
In contrast, it is hard to imagine how regulatory intervention will
improve the situation. First, regulatory solutions become a vehicle for
normative views about what searchers should see—or should want to see.39
How should we select among these normative views? What makes one bias
better than the other?
Second, regulatory intervention that promotes some search results
over others does not ensure that searchers will find the promoted search
results useful. Instead, government regulation rarely can do better than

35

In addition to the recent launch of major new search engines by providers like MSN, the
open-source software community is developing Nutch to allow anyone to build and
customize his or her own web search engine. http://lucene.apache.org/nutch/; see also
Olsen, Open-Source Niche, supra note 24.
36
See Rahul Telang et al., An Empirical Analysis of Internet Search Engine Choice, Aug.
2002. On file with author. For example, search engines use the same basic interface (a
white search box), and searchers rarely use advanced search features that might require
additional learning time at other search engines.
37
See Press Release, Vividence, Inc., Google Wins Users’ Hearts, But Not Their Ad Clicks
(May 25, 2004),
http://www.vividence.com/public/company/news+and+events/press+releases/2004-0525+ce+rankings+search.htm (stating that up to 47% of searchers try another search engine
when their search expectations are not met).
38
See Rahul Telang et al., The Market Structure for Internet Search Engines, 21 J. MGMT.
INFO. SYS. 137 (2004), available at
http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/~rtelang/engine_jmis_final.pdf (describing how searchers
sample heterogeneous ranking algorithms, which support a diversity of search engines);
Mário J. Silva, The Case for a Portuguese Web Search Engine,
http://xldb.fc.ul.pt/data/Publications_attach/tumba-icwi2003-final.pdf (describing the value
of a Portuguese-oriented search engine); cf. Jakob Nielsen, Diversity is Power for
Specialized Sites, JAKOB NIELSEN’S ALERTBOX, June 16, 2003,
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20030616.html (describing how specialized sites will
flourish on the Internet).
39
See, e.g., Susan L. Gerhart, Do Web Search Engines Suppress Controversy?, FIRST
MONDAY, Jan. 2004, http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_1/gerhart/. Gerhart argues
that search engines do not adequately prioritize search results that expose controversies
about the search topic. However, her argument assumes that controversy-related
information has value to consumers, an assumption that deserves careful evaluation.

120

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM
market forces at delivering results that searchers find relevant, so searchers
likely will find some of the promoted results irrelevant.
The clutter of unhelpful result may hinder searchers’ ability to
satisfy their search objectives, undermining searchers’ confidence in search
engines’ mind-reading abilities.40 In this case, regulatory intervention could
counterproductively degrade search engines’ value to searchers. Whatever
the adverse consequences of search engine bias, the consequences of
regulatory correction are probably worse.41
IV. TECHNOLOGICAL EVOLUTION WILL MOOT SEARCH ENGINE BIAS
Currently, search engines use “one-size-fits-all” ranking algorithms
to deliver homogeneous search results to searchers with heterogeneous
One-size-fits-all algorithms exacerbate the
search objectives.42
consequences of search engine bias in two ways: (1) it creates winners
(websites listed high in the search results) and losers (those with marginal
placement), and (2) it delivers suboptimal results for searchers with
minority interests.43
These consequences will abate when search engines migrate away
from one-size-fits-all algorithms towards “personalized” ranking
algorithms.44 Personalized algorithms produce search results that are
custom-tailored to each searcher’s interests, so searchers will see different
results in response to the same search query. For example, Google offers
searchers an option that “orders your search results based on your past
searches, as well as the search results and news headlines you’ve clicked
on.”45
Personalized ranking algorithms represent the next major advance in
search relevancy. One-size-fits-all ranking algorithms have inherent limits
on their maximum relevancy potential, and further improvements in one40

See Eric Goldman, A Coasean Analysis of Marketing, 2006 WIS. L. REV. __
(forthcoming).
41
See Susan P. Crawford, Shortness of Vision: Regulatory Ambition in the Digital Age, 74
FORDHAM L. REV. 695 (2005) (discussing the shortcomings of regulatory intervention in
organic information systems).
42
See James Pitkow et al., Personalized Search, COMM. ACM, Vol. 45:9 (Sept. 2002) at
50-1.
43
See Michael Kanellos, Microsoft Aims for Search on Its Own Terms, CNET News.com,
Nov. 24, 2003, http://news.com.com/2102-1008_3-5110910.html?tag=st.util.print (quoting
a Microsoft researcher as saying “If the two of us type a query [into a search engine], we
get the same thing back, and that is just brain dead. There is no way an intelligent human
being would tell us the same thing about the same topic.”); David H. Freedman, Why
Privacy Won’t Matter, NEWSWEEK, Apr. 3, 2006; Personalization of Placed Content
Ordering in Search Results, U.S. Patent App. 0050240580 (filed July 13, 2004).
44
See Pitkow, supra note 42, at 50.
45
What’s Personalized Search?, Google.com,
http://www.google.com/support/bin/answer.py?answer=26651&topic=1593 .

121

YALE JOURNAL OF LAW AND TECHNOLOGY

SPRING 2006

size-fits algorithms will yield progressively smaller relevancy benefits.
Personalized algorithms transcend those limits, optimizing relevancy for
each searcher and thus implicitly doing a better job of searcher mindreading.46
Personalized ranking algorithms also reduce the effects of search
engine bias. Personalized algorithms mean that there are multiple “top”
search results for a particular search term instead of a single “winner,”47 so
web publishers will not compete against each other in a zero-sum game.
Also, personalized algorithms necessarily will diminish the weight given to
popularity-based metrics (to give more weight for searcher-specific factors),
reducing the structural biases due to popularity. Personalized ranking
algorithms are not a panacea—any process where humans select and weight
algorithmic factors will produce some bias48—but personalized algorithms
will eliminate many of the current concerns about search engine bias.
V. CONCLUSION
Complaints about search engine bias implicitly reflect some
disappointed expectations. In theory, search engines can transcend the
deficiencies of predecessor media to produce a type of media utopia. In
practice, search engines are just like every other medium—heavily reliant
on editorial control and susceptible to human biases. This fact shatters any
illusions of search engine utopianism.
Fortunately, search engine bias may be largely temporal. In this
respect, I see strong parallels between search engine bias and the late 1990s
keyword metatag “problem.”49 Web publishers used keyword metatags to
distort search results, but these techniques worked only so long as search
engines considered keyword metatags in their ranking algorithms. When
search engines recognized the distortive effects of keyword metatags, they
changed their algorithms to ignore keyword metatags.50 Search result
relevancy improved, and the problem was solved without regulatory
intervention.
46

See Jaime Teevan et al., Personalizing Search via Automated Analysis of Interests and
Activities, SIGIR ’05, http://haystack.lcs.mit.edu/papers/teevan.sigir05.pdf; Terry
McCarthy, On the Frontier of Search, TIME, Aug. 28, 2005 (“Search will ultimately be as
good as having 1,000 human experts who know your tastes scanning billions of documents
within a split second.”) (quoting Gary Flake, Microsoft Distinguished Engineer).
47
See Kevin Lee, Search Personalization and PPC Search Marketing, CLICKZ NEWS, July
15, 2005, http://www.clickz.com/experts/search/strat/print.php/3519876.
48
Personalized algorithms have other potentially adverse consequences, such as creating
self-reinforcing information flows. See SUNSTEIN, supra note 26. For a critique of these
consequences, see Goldman, Coasean Analysis, supra note 40.
49
See generally Goldman, Deregulating Relevancy, supra note 7.
50
See Danny Sullivan, Death of a Meta Tag, SEARCH ENGINE WATCH, Oct. 1, 2002,
http://www.searchenginewatch.com/sereport/print.php/34721_2165061.

122

SEARCH ENGINE BIAS AND THE DEMISE OF SEARCH ENGINE UTOPIANISM
Similarly, search engines naturally will continue to evolve their
ranking algorithms and improve search result relevancy—a process that,
organically, will cause the most problematic aspects of search engine bias to
largely disappear. To avoid undercutting search engines’ quest for
relevance, this effort should proceed without regulatory distortion.

123

