Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage
23
ILCAPITALECULTURALE
eum
Rivista fondata da Massimo Montella

Il capitale culturale
Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage
n. 23, 2021
ISSN 2039-2362 (online)
Direttore / Editor in chief
Pietro Petraroia
Co-direttori / Co-editors
Tommy  D.  Andersson,  Elio  Borgonovi, 
Rosanna Cioffi, Stefano Della Torre, Michela 
di  Macco,  Daniele  Manacorda,  Serge Noiret, 
Tonino Pencarelli, Angelo R. Pupino, Girolamo 
Sciullo
Coordinatore editoriale / Editorial coordinator
Giuseppe Capriotti
Coordinatore tecnico / Managing coordinator
Pierluigi Feliciati
Comitato editoriale / Editorial board
Giuseppe Capriotti, Mara Cerquetti, Francesca 
Coltrinari, Patrizia Dragoni, Pierluigi Feliciati, 
Costanza Geddes da Filicaia, Maria Teresa 
Gigliozzi, Enrico Nicosia, Francesco Pirani, 
Mauro Saracco, Emanuela Stortoni
Comitato  scientifico  -  Sezione  di  beni 
culturali / Scientific Committee - Division of 
Cultural Heritage
Giuseppe  Capriotti,  Mara  Cerquetti, 
Francesca  Coltrinari,  Patrizia  Dragoni, 
Pierluigi  Feliciati,  Maria  Teresa  Gigliozzi, 
Susanne  Adina  Meyer,  Marta Maria  Montella, 
Umberto  Moscatelli, Sabina  Pavone, Francesco 
Pirani,  Mauro  Saracco,  Emanuela  Stortoni, 
Federico  Valacchi, Carmen  Vitale
Comitato scientifico / Scientific Committee
Michela Addis, Mario Alberto Banti, Carla 
Barbati, Caterina Barilaro, Sergio Barile, Nadia 
Barrella, Gian Luigi Corinto, Lucia Corrain, 
Girolamo Cusimano, Maurizio De Vita, Fabio 
Donato, Maria Cristina Giambruno, Gaetano 
Golinelli, Rubén Lois Gonzalez, Susan Hazan, 
Joel Heuillon, Federico Marazzi, Raffaella 
Morselli, Paola Paniccia, Giuliano Pinto, Carlo 
Pongetti, Bernardino Quattrociocchi, Margaret 
Rasulo, Orietta Rossi Pinelli, Massimiliano 
Rossi, Simonetta Stopponi, Cecilia Tasca, Andrea 
Ugolini, Frank Vermeulen, Alessandro Zuccari
Web
http://riviste.unimc.it/index.php/cap-cult
e-mail
icc@unimc.it
Editore / Publisher
eum edizioni università di macerata, Corso 
della Repubblica 51  –  62100 Macerata
tel (39) 733 258 6081
fax (39) 733 258 6086
http://eum.unimc.it
info.ceum@unimc.it
Layout editor
Roberta Salvucci
Progetto grafico / Graphics
+crocevia / studio grafico
Rivista accreditata WOS
Rivista riconosciuta SCOPUS
Rivista riconosciuta DOAJ
Rivista indicizzata CUNSTA
Rivista indicizzata SISMED
Inclusa in ERIH-PLUS

Museum, culture and digital 
innovations

Ludovico Solima, Mario Tani, Pasquale Sasso, Social innovation and accessibility in museum: some evidence from the SoStare 
al MANN project
«Il capitale culturale», n. 23, 2021, pp. 23-56
ISSN 2039-2362 (online); DOI: 10.13138/2039-2362/2518
Social innovation and accessibility 
in museum: some evidence from 
the SoStare al MANN project
*  Ludovico Solima, Full Professor in Management, University of Campania “L. Vanvitelli”, 
Department of Economics, Corso Gran Priorato di Malta, 81043 Capua, e-mail: ludovico.solima@
unicampania.it.
**  Mario Tani, Lecturer, University of Naples “Federico II”, Department of Economics, 
Management and Institutions, via Cinthia, 80126 Napoli, e-mail: mario.tani@unina.it.
***  Pasquale Sasso, Ph.D, University of Campania “L. Vanvitelli”, Department of Economics, 
Corso Gran Priorato di Malta, 81043 Capua, e-mail: pasquale.sasso@unicampania.it.
Ludovico Solima*, Mario Tani**, 
Pasquale Sasso***
Abstract
In recent years, the function of museums has changed from focusing on protecting 
cultural heritage to reach out to a wider audience and proposing a series of new methods 
to promote and display its collections and contribute towards collective cultural and social 
development. In this new vision, accessibility acquires a central role, asking to enable people 
who otherwise would have been excluded, be it because of physical disabilities or because 
suffering from behavioural and/or cognitive disorders, to enjoy the benefits of culture. 
Accordingly, some museums have developed a number of new approaches for people with 
special needs affected by autism spectrum disorder. At the same time these new activities 
are designed leveraging new competences and knowledge that museums only rarely own, 
but they can get access to them engaging local stakeholders in a process that starts from 

24
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
analysing the local area’ needs to develop new ways to visit the collections that can be seen 
as a social innovation. This work is concerned with analysing a project undertaken by the 
Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli (National Archaeological Museum of Naples) 
with some of its stakeholders, aiming to understand whether, by altering the perspective of 
analysis, museums can introduce totally novel ways to approach their collections, so that 
they are more inclusive and welcoming for people affected by behavioural and/or cognitive 
disorders. 
Negli ultimi anni, la funzione del museo è cambiata, passando dalla mera tutela del 
patrimonio culturale alla sua valorizzazione, tramite diversi e nuovi servizi rivolti a un più 
ampio pubblico, con il fine di essere un soggetto attivo per la crescita culturale e sociale 
della collettività. Al centro di questa funzione vi è l’accessibilità, che richiede di ampliare 
la fruizione del servizio alle persone affette da disabilità motorie e a quelle che presentano 
disordini comportamentali e/o cognitivi, tanto che alcuni musei hanno sviluppato nuovi 
approcci rivolti alle necessità delle persone affette da disordini dello spettro autistico. Allo 
stesso tempo queste nuove iniziative necessitano di competenze e conoscenze che solo 
raramente i musei hanno internamente, ma che possono essere ottenute coinvolgendo 
attivamente i portatori di interesse dell’organizzazione museale in un processo che parta 
dall’analisi delle necessità del contesto per sviluppare nuove modalità di fruizione che 
possono essere ritenute una forma di innovazione sociale. In questo lavoro si analizza un 
progetto che il Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli ha avviato insieme ad alcuni 
stakeholder per comprendere come sia possibile sviluppare nuove modalità per valorizzare 
le proprie collezioni, rendendole più inclusive nei confronti delle persone affette da disordini 
comportamentali e/o cognitivi.
1.  Introduction
According to the International Council of Museums (ICOM), a museum is «a 
non-profit, permanent institution in the service of society and its development, 
open to the public, which acquires, conserves, researches, communicates and 
exhibits the tangible and intangible heritage of humanity and its environment 
for the purposes of education, study and enjoyment»1. 
This statement explains that modern museums should set out to attract and 
welcome everyone2, as the means to contribute to cultural and social development 
within its local area and, in a wider sense, to that of society as a whole3. In 
order to attain this goal, museums should become attractive to a broader set of 
visitors4 and they should be able to overcome the barriers limiting the visitors 
from enjoying, appreciating and learning from the museum’s collections. 
The need for museums to be more open towards their community was 
emphasized by the Council of Europe in its Convention on the Value of 
1  <https://icom.museum/en/resources/standards-guidelines/museum-definition/>, 22.03.2021.
2  Martins 2012.
3  Solima 2004.
4  Hein 2006.

25
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
Cultural Heritage for Society (Faro Convention), adopted in Faro (Portugal) 
in 2005. This framework convention opened a new season in cultural policies, 
promoting more democratic participation in cultural heritage and a new scheme 
for its accessibility. The first article of the Faro Convention underlines the 
importance of involving all individuals and communities in safeguarding and 
enhancing cultural heritage, the responsibility of all towards cultural heritage 
and the need for synergy between private and public actors in the sector. Within 
the new function of cultural heritage, museums have the social responsibility 
of becoming a centre of cultural production and ensuring that everyone has 
the right to participate. In this way, museums must promote, through their 
work, the processes of creating value for their local territory and help that part 
of the community which, for various reasons, is detached from the museums’ 
traditional reach, to become active parts of the society5.
As shown by Suchy6, when museums are able to create, and nurture, their 
relationship with the key stakeholders in their community, they are able to 
create the emotional bonds that link a museum tightly to its territory and help 
to make it a central actor within the complex system in which it belongs7. In 
this perspective, communities should not be seen as homogeneous, but as multi-
faceted and ever-shifting entities in constant evolution. The changes within a 
community may drive museums to redefine their own actions to accommodate 
the new environmental request.
At the same time, museums should be able to leverage their stakeholders’ 
networks8 in order to access the broad set of competencies needed to address 
the various types of accessibility. Drawing on their network of relationships, 
museums can create new visiting experiences, whereby they communicate the 
value of their permanent collections more effectively and succeed in their social 
function of being able to entertain their audiences, to fulfil their function of 
becoming a testing ground for new forms of cultural citizenship, and support 
social relations and the sense of belonging to the local territory, promoting the 
value of accessibility.
Therefore, the main focus in this paper is to investigate how museums can 
effectively engage other social actors to get two different effects: on one side, 
these relationships should be able to leverage the competences of the other 
actors in the local community to expand their professional resources and to 
define new solutions to address the specific requirements of people with special 
needs; at the same time these relationships should be able to strengthen their 
relationship with the local community. At the same time, as a second research 
5  De Luca 2007; Walters 2009; Rappolt-Schlichtmann, Daley 2013; Brown, Mairesse 2018.
6  Suchy 2006.
7  Onciul 2013; Phillips et al. 2015.
8  Sciarelli, Tani 2013.

26
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
question, we want to investigate if these new solutions can be extended to other 
visitors, reducing the distance among the various audiences. 
In this paper, we present a study on a specific example of a project developed 
by the Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli (MANN), leveraging its 
network of relationships with a local association to design new services to 
answer the needs of a well-defined group of visitors, people affected by autism 
syndrome disorder, the SoStare al MANN project. We show how the project 
has helped in making the MANN more accessible, mostly in the cognitive 
dimension, to help these visitors fully enjoy their visit. At the same time, it has 
helped to design services that could be used even by other types of visitors.
The paper is structured as follows. The first part is dedicated to the analysis 
of the literature on the issues of social innovation, and we then present the 
literature on accessibility in museums. The third part covers the methodological 
approach of the work, to define the research questions and justify the case study 
selection; then, in the fourth part, we present the case, highlighting the actors 
involved and the various phases of the project. After describing the case, we 
discuss the main findings of this paper, giving some theoretical and managerial 
implications and, in the conclusions, we set out the main limitations of this 
study, together with suggestions for further research.
2.  Literature review
2.1  Social innovation
Social innovation is generically defined as «the creation and implementation 
of new solutions to social problems, with the benefits of these solutions shared 
beyond the confines of the innovators»9, although, according to some scholars10, 
it still lacks a commonly accepted and comprehensive definition. 
Van der Have and Rubalcaba11 see social innovation as a multi-faceted 
phenomenon with four possible levels. The first is the level of grassroots social 
innovation, i.e. responding to pressing social demands which usually cannot 
be satisfied through more traditional market-based solutions. The second level 
consists of novel products and services produced by private, public, and third 
sector organizations (or a combination thereof). The third level is composed of 
the new combinations of social practices, attitudes and values, and the fourth 
9  Tracey, Stott 2017, p. 51.
10  Pol, Ville 2009; Lawrence et al. 2014; Edwards-Schachter, Wallace 2017.
11  Van der Have, Rubalcaba 2016.

27
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
and last level is that of systemic innovations, involving fundamental changes in 
strategies and policies, organizational structures and institutional frameworks. 
Mumford defined social innovation as «the generation and implementation 
of new ideas about social relationships and social organization»12. Within the 
same stream, several scholars13 have perceived it as the capability of society, 
or some of its parts, to see socio-environmental issues and solve them through 
processes of change. These new solutions mostly deal with issues linked to the 
environment, social services or culture and education. This is a broad vision of 
social innovation, and can encompass many different processes, starting from 
new ideas to address social issues and/or solve unsatisfied needs in a local area14.
According to other scholars15, the diffusion of social innovation within social 
sciences is a consequence of rising interest on the part of private companies, 
public organizations and community groups, which are actively pursuing more 
efficient solutions to existing social problems or, trying to anticipate potential 
new solutions before the problems escalate, with the contribution of, and the 
coordination with, institutions, business and other individuals.
Social innovation can still be considered as an emerging field of research16, 
with several studies17 seeing it as a way to improve quality of life, while some 
scholars18 examined the outcomes of the processes of social innovation. 
According to them, these innovations are more about creating value and less 
about creating profit and, in most cases, they may lead to successful new 
enterprises and business models that may be seen as partially profit-oriented and 
partially not-profit oriented. At the same time, according to other academics, 
an innovation is only a social one when the new way to solve the problem 
is more effective, efficient, sustainable and fair than the existing solution19. 
Likewise, as these innovations are not developed for the purposes of profit only, 
the new beneficial effects must be able to create value for society as a whole, 
instead of being limited to only some individuals20. In a similar perspective, as 
highlighted by Ziegler21, other studies see social innovation as a subdomain of 
normal studies into innovation22.
12  Mumford 2002, p. 253.
13  Mulgan et al. 2007.
14  Mulgan et al. 2007; Murray et al. 2010.
15  Lettice, Parekh 2010; Lawrence et al. 2014; Phillips et al. 2015; van Wijk et al. 2018.
16  Dacin et al. 2010.
17  Harrisson et al. 2012; McKelvey, Zaring 2018.
18  Bessant, Tidd 2007; Bhatt, Ahmad 2017; Tracey, Stott 2017.
19  Phills et al. 2008.
20  Bessant, Tidd 2007; Phills et al. 2008; Bhatt, Ahmad 2017.
21  Ziegler 2017.
22  Ziegler highlights even a third stream in the social innovation literature. This less enthusiastic 
and more sceptical stream sees social innovation as a case for a switch to other concepts, such as 
social inequality and social justice that are less favourably accepted. See Ziegler 2017, p. 400.

28
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
Another group of scholars has focused more on the implementation of social 
innovation. For example, for Howaldt and Schwarz23, this means the actions 
of actors, or a group of actors, ultimately create a new combination or new 
configuration of social practices that were intentionally designed to solve a 
given social need or issue better than existing established practices. Similarly, 
Cajaiba-Santana24 identifies social innovations as new social practices created 
by one or more social actors that intentionally seek to induce social change by 
reconfiguring how these very same social goals are accomplished. 
At the same time, according to Ruiz and Parra25, social innovation is only 
really accomplished when the social actors can disseminate it to other parts of 
society that may need the new practices and related policies. Equally, Pol and 
Ville26 claim that social innovation is only fully accomplished if it can have a 
permanent impact on the perceptions and behaviours of people in certain areas. 
More recently, Purtik and Arenas (2019) found that social actors can effectively 
leverage the process of social innovation to change societal norms, spreading 
other, more sustainable behaviour among the other actors in their environment, 
themselves leveraging their example27. In the same stream of research, several 
scholars see the processes of social innovation as system-changing practices that 
could alter perceptions and act as an instrument for social change28.
Social innovations are usually more complex and more ambiguous than 
conventional business innovation29. This is because social innovators tend to 
have to satisfy a wider range of stakeholders, each with different priorities and 
potentially conflicting interests and viewpoints, and such social innovation may 
require fundamental and systemic transformations or change that challenge the 
status quo30.
According to some scholars, social innovation is the direct consequence 
of the experiences and learning processes undergone by social actors, such as 
social enterprises and NGOs31. Mulgan32, on the contrary, claims that social 
innovation is not limited to the actions taken by third sector actors, as its 
effectiveness is linked to how engaged the different social actors are throughout 
the various phases from design to dissemination. Papaluca and Tani33 linked 
the third sector’s effectiveness in implementing social innovation to their ability 
to involve a broader set of stakeholders in their processes, in that the third 
23  Howaldt, Schwarz 2010.
24  Cajaiba-Santana 2014.
25  Ruiz, Parra 2013.
26  Pol, Ville 2009.
27  Purtik, Arenas 2019.
28  McKelvey, Zaring 2018; Westley, Antadze 2010.
29  Hall, Vredenburg 2003.
30  Gladwin et al. 1995; Noci, Verganti 1999; Mulgan et al. 2007; van Wijk et al. 2018.
31  Dees 1998; Paton 2003; Harding 2004.
32  Mulgan 2006.
33  Papaluca, Tani 2010.

29
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
sector players can overcome their structural lack of resources by exploiting 
their social capital and gaining new perspectives on the different needs arising 
in their environment34.
Mulgan35 holds that social innovation is only rarely completely new 
innovation, and usually derives from the ability to observe and adapt solutions 
that have been applied to similar problems in different contexts. It follows that 
the value of social innovation is the outcome of a transparent and collaborative 
value co-creation process built upon a multi-stakeholder engagement36. Social 
innovation opens the door onto seeing innovation as a multi-disciplinary and 
multi-stakeholder collaboration, where various actors are able to participate in 
changing the behaviours of other actors in the same system37.
In general, according to several scholars38, social innovation is most 
effective when it is the result of a collective process initiated by individuals, 
or single social movements, that are able to engage other public and private 
social actors, in order to become more effective at capitalizing on the different 
resources accessed by the entire network of actors. Several scholars39 speak 
about the need to identify a social innovation system composed of the various 
communities in which social innovation processes are developed, with the 
participation of a range of stakeholders, including those in the public and third 
sector and consumers.
Lusch and Vargo40 argue that social innovation should be analysed by placing 
emphasis on the actor-to-actor networks and resource integration processes 
needed for enabling a co-creation of value that can potentially succeed in 
sustaining social innovation over time. According to Huq41, social innovation 
may be a third path to designing and implementing new social services. The 
author suggests that organizations intending to design new, innovative social 
services, especially if these services are to be deployed in tightly regulated fields, 
should adopt a three-step process, involving professional organizations and 
individuals in the development of the new solutions. In the first step, defined 
by Huq as entwining problems, the organization should stop seeing the issues 
that it is tackling as separate problems and, instead, try to engage with the local 
communities and adopt a more systemic approach. The second step is known as 
reconfiguring arrangements, undertaken so that the various organizations are 
ready to accept the needed changes. The third step is active waiting, whereby 
34  Lipparini 2002; Papaluca, Tani 2010.
35  Mulgan 2006.
36  Brodie et al. 2019; Rahman et al. 2019.
37  Ziegler 2017.
38  Mulgan 2006; Salim Saji, Ellingstad 2016.
39  Phillips et al. 2015; Carberry et al. 2019.
40  Lusch, Vargo 2014.
41  Huq 2019.

30
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
innovation is encouraged but not actively pursued in local settings, letting the 
various professionals drive the process of innovation.
In museums social innovation can be linked to the various activities designed, 
with the help of external stakeholders, to better fulfil their new social function.
2.2  Accessibility as a driving factor of the social function of the museum
According to the spirit of the Faro Convention, the new museum shifts 
from being a mere container to an institution where the cultural wealth of 
its permanent collections are assets to be shared and promoted42. The static 
vision has prevailed over the dynamic one for a long time, making it difficult 
for museums to engage with other than their traditional audiences, and 
totally excluding those whose knowledge does not meet the museum’s lofty 
expectations43. One of the main criticisms of the traditional concept of museum 
is that it focuses overly on the protection and conservation side, paying too little 
attention to that of making its collections engaging and exciting44. The result 
is that the visitor experience is often overlooked or oversimplified45. The habit 
of not dwelling too much on the needs of users, or else considering the public 
to be an amorphous cluster of passive and uncritical consumers, replicates the 
positions taken for most of the twentieth century, and which had also applied to 
the entertainment and advertising sector, and has equally evolved. The primary 
mission of the museum has become the transmission of cultural heritage to 
future generations, helping to cultivate the community’s own identity. The 
museum is now seen as the means by which society presents and acknowledges 
its relationship with its own history and that of other cultures. 
In 2020, Taylor46 found that even the image of art museums, traditionally 
perceived as repositories of fine art for audiences to observe at a distance, is 
no longer valid. Museums are considered to be places where people engage 
with the arts, and arenas for cooperation with audiences and neighbouring 
communities. Barnes and McPherson47 found that one way for a museum 
to expand its accessibility is for it to engage with parts of its community in 
redefining museum services, or at least how artwork can be experienced by its 
visitors, transforming it into a hybrid institution that is able to educate and 
entertain its audiences at the same time.
In 2009, the Commission for Education at ICOM Italy classified museum 
visitors into adults, children, young people, the elderly, the physically and 
42  Besozzi 2007.
43  Solima et al. 2019.
44  Ferraro 2011.
45  Rodari 2005.
46  Taylor 2020.
47  Barnes, McPherson 2019.

31
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
mentally disabled, citizens of other cultures, tourists, professionals in training, 
family groups and participants in social reintegration programmes, because 
the educational purposes of museums are the development and promotion 
of knowledge, skills and behaviours that manifest themselves throughout the 
life of each individual. The Commission emphasized the fact that museums 
have a social responsibility towards their local communities. Museums must 
necessarily place themselves in an open and listening position towards their 
communities, question their role and rethink their function, in order to interact 
effectively with current events characterized by elements of complexity and 
dynamism. 
Museums can be the bearers of major social benefits48. Alongside the 
cultural value of knowledge built and disseminated by museums, is the 
value of social relations which they can potentially promote49. Without the 
relationship between cultural heritage and individuals, the museum would 
return to taking the simple role of container. By emphasizing the relationship 
between the museum, the various stakeholders and the community, museums 
are referred to as places where different cultures are put into contact, rather 
than as institutions that impart knowledge to visitors50. It should be noted that 
museums are themselves communities with their own values and conventions, 
and they differ from each other in the way they evolve in relation to the context 
in which they are inserted. 
The museum has the purpose of supporting critical learning and the process 
whereby people internalize cultural heritage so that it becomes a value for each 
individual. This idea goes in parallel with the principle of leveraging continuous 
learning to help develop a democratic and active citizenship51. The social 
function of a museum is apparently even recognized by the medical sector; in 
Canada, doctors have recently been prescribing museum visits as a therapy in 
conjunction with taking medicines. It can be said then that the museum is good 
for health.
In order to exercise its new social functions, as explicitly requested by the 
international community, the modern museum must open itself to the needs of the 
community, offer itself as a testing ground for new forms of cultural citizenship, 
promote and support social relations and the sense of belonging to the local 
territory, and oppose phenomena of social exclusion by promoting the value 
of accessibility52. As highlighted by Cerquetti53, as a museum’s organization 
must create value for all its stakeholders, it should not limit itself to protecting 
cultural heritage but should be able to promote and enhance it. The museum’s 
48  ICOM 2009.
49  Clifford 1997.
50  Singer 2007.
51  Pinna 2000.
52  Solima 2012.
53  Cerquetti 2010.

32
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
publics should be able to participate in the processes of value creation, and 
other actors should be brought in to improve the management skills held within 
museums. In other words, museums must activate practices that allow them to 
involve their community more closely. Engagement, according to Onciul54, has 
the great potential of benefiting not only the museums but their communities as 
well. The outcome of these practices is to engender a closer bond between the 
two sets of actors, and more, the two groups can share their activities, and the 
interaction of a museum with new actors can create new narratives and new 
perspectives that can increase the value of the museum’s offer. At the same time, 
the various organizations should be wary of the distribution of power within 
the engagement process as, even during the process itself, the different roles will 
be continuously changing, not according to some pre-defined plan, but because 
of the role that each actor effectively has in every single part of the process55. 
Community engagement, in museum literature, has been defined as «museum 
programs that usually involve individuals or groups who do not or cannot 
use museums, and that may take place both in museums and in a range of 
community spaces»56. In community engagement processes, art collections are 
relevant and meaningful, but they are clearly not central57; they are the means 
to create new connections, and how new interests are sparked. These processes 
may require people to break down the wall between visitor and works of art, so 
that the visitor can touch them, or a close replica, or interact with them through 
other media, arts, crafts or photography58.
The only way for museums to be more open and involve their communities 
more closely is to promote the value of accessibility. The theme of accessibility 
in the museum sector is certainly a distinctly current topic, as it is still able 
to offer various possibilities for multi-disciplinary comparisons, open to 
the contribution of the widest spectrum of professionals operating in the 
various fields dealing with culture. There is an increasingly large and diverse 
section of population that, through temporary or permanent circumstances 
determined by physiological or pathological causes, has limited possibilities of 
freely accessing and using the museum spaces, or of joining in cultural and 
educational initiatives. In this perspective, the State and the bodies responsible 
for ensuring equal rights for all are expected and required to know the citizens’ 
needs, and to provide suitable services. Therefore, both at central and local 
level, it is essential to pursue policies for equal opportunity and, above all, 
equal access, which increase dissemination and sharing a culture of accessibility 
among professionals and citizens, promoting the paradigm of culture open to 
all and for all. 
54  Onciul 2013.
55  Ibidem.
56  Morse, Munro 2018, p. 358.
57  Morse, Munro 2018.
58  Solima, Tani 2016.

33
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
This new model, set out by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities59, is inspired by the full compliance and application 
of the right to accessible culture, understood as both ensuring physical access 
to places of culture and cognitive access to the contents they produce and 
promote60. From this perspective, museums can be considered as effective 
tools against the bane of social exclusion, as they are not mere repositories of 
artwork, but suppliers of free knowledge able to reach everyone. It follows that, 
by pursuing their institutional purposes, museums can become instruments of 
social cohesion capable of fully interpreting the paradigm of open culture. The 
new vision of the museum focuses on its educational nature and its natural 
orientation towards the public, both being vocations that lead museums to be 
of all and for all.
The goal of becoming a space that all can access should not be interpreted 
as simply removing architectural or physical barriers, but rather as ensuring 
that everyone can fully enjoy the museums’ collections. Only by promoting 
a dialogue devoid of any form of discrimination with the outside world will 
museums be able to take on a role of primary importance within contemporary 
society. The relationship between a museum and its communities is not new61 
and, according to Morse and Munro62, is defined in several policies where 
museums are asked to engage with specific target communities, such as people 
from minority ethnic groups, socio-economically deprived areas and disability 
groups. In these undertakings, museum staff should provide a welcoming, 
inclusive and safe environment and, most importantly, a space where visitors 
feel that they will not be judged.
The term accessibility indicates, first of all, that all users can move around 
in complete safety and autonomy; therefore, accessibility is an indispensable 
requirement for liveability and is often associated with the concept of 
environmental comfort, alongside the removal of access barriers in buildings. 
At a first glance, accessibility can be understood as the set of spatial, 
distributive and organizational characteristics in buildings designed to be used 
by anyone and everyone.
Accessibility is an essential prerogative for cultural places, as they are used by 
the community to carry out activities mostly associated with cultural heritage. 
As a consequence, a fundamental feature in the protection and enhancement of 
heritage is the fact that the spaces intended for this purpose must be accessible 
and welcoming in order to be adequately used. The issue of accessibility has 
always been associated with that of disability, but in recent years something 
59  United Nations 2007.
60  Moussouri (2007) defined a social model of accessibility using three dimensions, i.e. 
economic, environmental, and cultural barriers; several years later, Solima (2012) added a fourth 
dimension to the social model, that of digital accessibility. 
61  Watson 2007.
62  Morse, Munro 2018.

34
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
has been changing on this front. Because of a renewed attention on the various 
categories that make up the cultural demand, there seems to be a stronger 
interest in ensuring the right to access places of culture, and thus of providing 
an autonomous, easy and safe cultural experience to an extended audience, 
including all people with any physical, motor, sensory or cognitive special 
needs, whether permanent or temporary. 
There are four main dimensions to accessibility, which can be economic, 
physical, cognitive or digital63. The economic dimension has its origin in the 
need to ensure that all citizens have the same opportunity to satisfy their need 
for culture regardless of their financial situation. In most cases, however, the 
entrance ticket is only one of the costs that users must incur to use the cultural 
service. There are clearly the direct costs linked to transport to reach the site, 
and the evaluation of the economic dimension of accessibility must also take 
into account the costs relating to the time spent on making an adequate use 
of the cultural service, and those associated with how and where to access 
information. It is clear that merely evaluating the costs a visitor incurs to access 
the service is only a small part of that person’s overall investment to derive the 
maximum benefit from services in the cultural sector.
The second dimension of accessibility is equally important and concerns 
the museum’s physical accessibility. According to this dimension, the service 
can be said to be accessible only when the museum is equipped with adequate 
infrastructures. Physical accessibility also takes on a double perspective. Within 
the structure, being accessible means having taken the necessary steps to 
eliminate all physical barriers that make it difficult, if not impossible, for even a 
relatively small segment of users to navigate around the museum’s collections. 
Shifting the attention to outside the museum, it must be possible to evaluate 
how easily the museum can be reached without facing overly many logistics 
difficulties, assessing public transport and relative connections, car parks and, 
more generally, access roads. Another dimension of accessibility is that linked 
to the cognitive profile. It can often be the case that, even when a museum is 
easy to access physically, its information systems are difficult to understand. 
Making a museum cognitively accessible has three positive effects. It makes 
up for any inadequacy on the part of the visitors, it creates more loyal visitors 
and it becomes a more active player within the local community.
When cultural enterprises manage to eliminate this type of barrier, they 
significantly reduce any sense of cultural inadequacy in the user. This feeling is a 
major psychological obstacle that can help to explain why some people belong 
to the group of non-public64.
From this point of view, the categories of disadvantaged users deserve 
particular attention. These are people with motor or sensory problems, and 
63  Solima 2012, 2017; Da Milano, Sciacchitano 2015; Cetorelli, Guido 2017.
64  Presta 2010.

35
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
who may not be encouraged to use the museum’s services. Taking into account 
the growing diffusion of digital technologies, it is necessary to acknowledge the 
existence of an accessibility dimension specific to this area. 
Museums must learn to manage their presence on the internet not by limiting 
themselves to a simple website, where they merely replicate information 
contained in their catalogues. They must try to initiate processes of user 
engagement, setting in motion faster content creation mechanisms that have 
themselves become the basis for creating a stable relationship with users, 
with the added benefit of increased user loyalty65. Through this relationship, 
a museum will have access to a varied set of resources, including videos and 
photographs of the museum’s interior and of individual events, and will benefit 
from all the flows of information deriving from the interaction between users. 
All museums recognize the importance of being more accessible to visitors 
and potential visitors, but today there are still many barriers to accessibility. 
For this reason, museums must find solutions to become more accessible 
and respond fully to their mission, including by resorting to external skills. 
Among the various types of accessibility, sensorial perception is one of the most 
important66. It, therefore, seems necessary to define the perimeter of the term 
multi-sensory, as it indicates more than one sense67. 
Taste comes into play least but still in a residual manner in a museum visit. 
The many possible relationships between the world of food and wine and that 
of art are easily appreciated. It is no coincidence that most major museums 
choose to sell edible products in their shops, often connected to their collections 
or temporary exhibitions. The sense of smell comes next, seemingly stimulated 
in a fairly simple and economic way, through the use of natural fragrances or 
electronic fragrance diffusers that can increase the experiential perception of 
the visit. In the third place is touch, as the tactile dimension can be affected both 
by the visitors’ relationship with the objects on display and by the information 
presented. Museums can prepare tactile routes, identifying the works that can 
be touched by visually impaired visitors, and information can be written in 
Braille. The two senses most used by museum visitors are sight and hearing. In 
particular, sight is used by visitors to find their way around the often-unknown 
exhibition spaces, as well as to look at the exhibits and access the museum’s 
various information media.
Over the past twenty years, the sense of sight has been strongly affected by 
technological progress. The extent to which museums can provide information 
on portable devices (through smartphones, tablets and wearables) via apps 
is now ubiquitous, paving the way for automatic orientation solutions (way-
finding) as well as infinite possibilities for customizing the contents, i.e. 
65  Solima 2018.
66  Dodd et al. 1998.
67  Howes 1991; Levent, Pascual-Leone 2014.

36
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
presenting information flows according to the visitors’ wishes, interests or more 
simply the time they have to visit68.
People affected with the autism spectrum disorder are among the new 
audiences that can particularly benefit from a multi-sensorial approach to the 
exhibitions.
2.3  Museum and autism
According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, a 
handbook produced by the American Psychiatric Association, autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder that affects communication and 
behaviour. Although autism can be diagnosed at any age, it is said to be a 
developmental disorder because symptoms generally appear in the first two 
years of life. Autism is often seen as one of the most complex and pervasive 
disorders of the developmental age, as its effects are permanent and the sufferer 
is impaired for life. Autism is considered to be a syndrome affecting a person’s 
whole personality; therefore, it is referred to as a generalized and pervasive 
developmental disorder69. Autism spectrum disorder is a serious disability and, 
while physical appearance is normal, it may affect several brain functions. 
Autistic people are physically healthy and develop like their peers, moreover 
the effects may be rather uneven; autism manifests itself through a vast series 
of symptoms, so it is usually referred to as autistic spectrum disorder (ASD)70.
According to Cottini and Vivanti71, the most affected areas are:
	– mutual social interaction: inability to establish social, emotional and/or 
empathetic relationships with others;
	– impairment in communication: inability to communicate ideas and 
feelings plus language-related impairments;
	– behaviour, restricted, repetitive and stereotyped activities and interests: 
constantly focusing on a few interests or habits, limiting the autistic 
child’s ability to carry out other tasks.
Classic examples of the behaviour of people with ASD are sudden mood 
swings, with inappropriate laughter or crying, hyperactivity or passivity, self-
aggressive behaviour, often joined by phobias and sleep and eating disorders. 
Some patients are particularly sensitive to sound, touch, sight and smell, and 
when their senses are stimulated, they can be driven to extreme reactions, such as 
panic attacks72. The three characteristic symptoms of autistic disorder (impaired 
social interaction, communication problems and abnormal behaviour) can vary 
68  Alunno 2017.
69  Cottini 2009, 2016.
70  Cattelan 2010.
71  Cottini, Vivanti 2016.
72  Ianes, Cramerotti 2002; Ianes, Zappella 2009.

37
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
widely in intensity and incisiveness. With such disparity in level of severity and 
appearance of symptoms, it can be difficult to understand the related behaviours 
and set in place suitable interventions73. 
Today, the focus of the debate seems to have increasingly shifted from 
the individual’s disability to features in the environment, which can take the 
form of barriers and create an impairment or act as enabling mechanisms 
that can eliminate limitations and encourage full social participation. Every 
environmental context can be configured as a barrier or a facilitator; in the case 
of museums, many young people with ASD and families with autistic children 
find them a barrier74.
One consideration concerns the fairly widespread practice of distinguishing 
between physical accessibility to the museum’s buildings and accessibility to 
the museum’s collections and symbolic meaning of exhibitions, as well as to 
the various educational programmes. While the first type of accessibility relates 
mainly, but not exclusively, to architectural and physical barriers, the second 
type presents a much broader perspective and, despite it being generally linked 
to sensory and psycho-cognitive disabilities, its topics and reasonings can 
potentially be applied to most users75. For a museum to be truly accessible 
and inclusive towards people with autism spectrum disorder, its work must 
necessarily involve these people, their families and experts in the field who often 
have no place in the museum’s organizational chart76.
3.  Method and research design
The literature review on social innovation has highlighted that, for 
organizations to be effective social innovators, they must be able to set up a co-
operative process, bringing in different stakeholders to create a wider viewpoint 
and increase the effectiveness of these processes77.
In order to become active actors within these processes of innovation, 
museums should create a network of relationships to broaden their perspective78 
and transform their reality into a social innovation system79. Designing new 
social innovation processes may help museums to leverage the competencies 
of the various stakeholders in the community with whom the museum is able 
73  Anaby et al. 2013.
74  Askari et al. 2015.
75  Kulik, Fletcher 2016; Coffey 2018.
76  Caldin et al. 2018.
77  Onciul 2013; Carberry et al. 2019; Taylor 2020.
78  Howaldt, Schwarz 2010; Lawrence et al. 2014; van Wijk et al. 2018.
79  Phillips et al. 2015; Carberry et al. 2019.

38
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
to engage80. Moreover, according to Huq’s model of social innovation81, the 
actors should let the various professionals deal with the innovation process by 
tapping into their own pool of expertise. 
In this perspective, museums that intend to include people with ASD among 
their audiences, to educate them in becoming an active part of the community, 
should be able to bring together the needs of these people, those of their families 
and those of the experts who deal with these issues. Museums should be able to 
create a system that includes expertise that is often not found within their own 
organization82.
On the contrary, social innovation processes provide a link between 
the museum and its community and strengthen the museum’s relationship 
with a number of stakeholders, which may be in the public or third sector, 
or be consumers. Local communities may also benefit from this stakeholder 
engagement process83. The two sets of actors are hence more connected and, 
additionally, they can share their undertakings and, through their interaction, 
the new actors can create new narratives and new perspectives, which, in turn, 
can increase the value of the museum’s offer.
In the light of these considerations, we set out our first research question as 
follows:
RQ1: How may museums engage social actors within the local community 
to improve their activities?
	– RQ1a: May museums engage with the social actors in the local 
community to expand their professional resources and to get access 
to specific skill and competences?
	– RQ1b: May museums engage with social actors within the local 
community to strengthen their relationship with the territory?
As social actors and cultural institutions, museums have the social function 
of providing access to their cultural resources in an inclusive way to all their 
audiences84. 
Among the four different dimensions of museum accessibility85, cognitive 
accessibility is particularly interesting because, by becoming more inclusive and 
breaking down barriers, museums may become more attractive to a broader 
group of audiences. 
Some of the cognitive barriers to being an accessible museum, such as those 
related to ASD, demand the creation of new social services, which make use 
80  Morse, Munro 2018.
81  Huq 2019.
82  Caldin et al. 2018.
83  Onciul 2013.
84  Cerquetti 2010; Solima 2015.
85  Solima 2012, 2017; Da Milano, Sciacchitano 2015; Cetorelli, Guido 2017.

39
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
of specific health-related professional services. While these areas are often in 
need of social innovation, they are usually unable to change easily, as they must 
comply with specific protocols86. At the same time, museums designing new 
services must interpret their cultural resources in a new light, proposing them in 
a new, multi-sensorial way and so create a broader range of options87.
According to some scholars88, these new multi-sensorial perspective 
approaches touch upon topics and thought processes that can potentially be 
valid for most users.
RQ2: May the solutions developed for people with special needs also be 
extended to other audiences?
In order to find an answer to these research questions, we decided to study 
the process of creating and implementing a museum service designed for people 
with ASD as part of a wider framework to study how to insert these people 
within the wider visitor set.
We used a case study, as this method can be used to analyse the items 
identified in our literature review within a real-life context89, considering this 
approach as functional for the explorative purposes of this study, consistent 
with a constructivist, qualitative and inductive logic90.
We focused our case on a specific project carried out by the Naples-based 
MANN museum, entitled SoStare al Mann. This name is a play on the words 
sostare, to pause/take a short time-out while in the museum, and so stare, 
knowing how to be/behave there.
We chose the MANN’s project for our study as the museum is influential 
within the Italian landscape and it is a unique environment that was the first 
Italian museum to prepare a Strategic Plan and so become more transparent in 
the eyes of the local and not-so-local communities91 and it has started several 
projects to re-define its social function92. It is one of the most visited museums in 
Italy (according to MiBACT, the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Tourism, 
it attracted more than 670,000 visitors in 2019, and is the 10th most visited of 
all Italian museums and heritage sites).
Moreover, the museum had no previous experience in working with this 
specific group of visitors, meaning that it was easier to follow the progress 
of how the various sections of the involved community interacted with the 
museum’s organization. The MANN was chosen despite it being possibly a 
86  Adler et al. 2008; Zietsma et al. 2017.
87  Alunno 2017.
88  Kulik, Fletcher 2016; Coffey 2018.
89  Lazzeretti et al. 2015; Yin 2017.
90  Hennink et al. 2011.
91  Solima, Giulierini 2018.
92  Seawright, Gerring 2008; Mariotto et al. 2014.

40
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
worst-case scenario for creating new services for people affected by ASD, with 
its wide galleries, mostly permanent collections and general lack of support 
material for visitors. As a consequence, the SoStare al MANN project could not 
draw on existing resources and/or practices when creating the new services, and 
the professionals were constrained by the actual collections, but nobody had to 
deal with internal resistance.
4.  Case study: the SoStare al MANN project
The project ran from January 2017 to June 2018, at the behest the MANN’s 
management, which has recognized the need for the museum to be accessible to 
people living under conditions of disability, especially people with ASD. SoStare 
al MANN is an experimental path aimed at widening the museum’s community, 
engaging the community more closely in the museum’s life and helping to carry 
out one of the museum’s main social functions, that of spreading art and culture. 
The challenge faced by MANN and its main partner, the FOQUS Foundation 
(mostly represented in the project by the FOQUS director, Renato Quaglia), 
was in changing the way to address cultural services for people affected by 
cognitive disorders. The museum created a new cultural experience by 
introducing targeted educational tours, exploiting new visual aids and special 
communication strategies particularly suited to autistic visitors, but open to all 
types of audiences, i.e. the museum had become more inclusive. 
The common thread running through the project is the effectiveness of the 
communication tools used to spread the museum’s cultural message.
4.1  The actors involved in the project
4.1.1  The Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli (MANN)
The Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli – MANN (National 
Archaeological Museum of Naples) was simultaneously the promoter and the 
place where the project was implemented. The museum is among the oldest and 
most important in the world for the wealth and uniqueness of its heritage and its 
contribution to the European cultural panorama. The origin of the collections 
can be traced to Charles III, who ruled Naples as Charles of Bourbon from 
1734 to 1759, and his cultural policies. The king was behind the excavations 
of the cities buried by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE (with digs 
starting at Herculaneum in 1738 and at Pompeii in 1748) and he oversaw the 
construction of the Museo Farnese in the city, where he transferred part of the 

41
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
rich collection inherited from his mother Elisabetta Farnese from her residences 
in Rome and Parma. 
The museum acquired national status in 1860, and its collections were 
enriched with finds from excavations in archaeological sites in Campania and 
Southern Italy and with acquisitions from private collections. The Pinacoteca 
(Picture Gallery) was moved to Capodimonte in 1957, determining the 
museum’s current embodiment as an Archaeological Museum. In 2016, with 
the arrival of its new director, Paolo Giulierini, the museum presented its 
inaugural Strategic Plan (the first of all museums in Italy to do so), which set 
out its various strategic objectives, among which the specific aim of improving 
the museum’s accessibility for particular sections of public, including people 
with physical and cognitive disabilities.
4.1.2  FOQUS Foundation
FOQUS (Fondazione Quartieri Spagnoli) is an urban regeneration project 
operating in the heart of Naples’ old city centre since 2014. The FOQUS 
Foundation is located in an old building in the upper part of Naples (so-
called: Spanish Quarter). The Foundation has renovated parts of the building, 
providing spaces for young entrepreneurs and so creating new jobs and new 
businesses. It has hosted several independent public and private companies, 
to help build an economically productive community of cultural and creative 
industries, working in personal care, training and education. In 2016, with the 
help of private partners, the FOQUS Foundation inaugurated Argo, a centre 
providing assistance to people with cognitive disabilities. Argo helps children, 
teenagers and young adults with disabilities to discover their own value and 
pursue their goals through concrete objectives. The project claims to give each 
individual the basic skills to improve their life and their psycho-physical well-
being autonomously, helping them to be better at school, at work, and so on.
4.2  The SoStare al MANN project
The project was intended for a group of ten young people who were already 
going to the Argo Centre, plus other pupils from a nearby school, Dalla parte 
dei bambini. The meetings were arranged in various ways, with the children 
attending the centre visiting the museum sometimes alone and sometimes with 
the other schoolchildren. The choice behind the Argo children visiting the 
museum with the children from the school was based upon two very specific 
reasons. Firstly, Dalla parte dei bambini has policies in place to be as inclusive 
as possible. Secondly, we wanted to see what would happen in a museum when 
schoolchildren were visiting the galleries and artwork.

42
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
4.3  The project phases
The project started in January 2017, with practical tests being carried out 
between September 2017 and June 2018. The phases of the project can be 
summarized as follows:
	– First phase: meetings between the management of the MANN and the 
FOQUS Foundation, from January 2017;
	– Second phase: study of international models of museum accessibility for 
people with cognitive disabilities, from April 2017 to September 2017;
	– Third phase: direct testing and field experience with disabled young 
people and primary school pupils, from September 2017 to June 2018.
4.3.1  First phase: understanding
The project partners studied the cultural, territorial and experiential context 
on accessibility and cognitive and/or psychic impairments, as the project 
focused on understanding how a person visiting the MANN could relate to 
an artwork and discover the related meanings, the main opportunities and the 
consequences of this connection.
The first phase concentrated on identifying, for each different type of 
disability, the tools and/or devices best suited to help the visitors with cognitive 
or behavioural disabilities find interest and value in visiting a museum. 
The project partners needed to define the museum’s objectives, how to 
engage with the museum’s employees and identify the room for manoeuvre in 
terms of breaking down sensory, communicative, architectural and financial 
barriers. The driving principles of this phase were both being accessible and let 
the children be an active part of the visitors’ community, in order to consider 
the lack of accessibility as the problem, not the visitor. 
In general, the group tried to identify new practices to be inclusive and 
accessible, not just for people with disabilities, but for anyone. 
4.3.2  Second phase: research
In April 2017, FOQUS launched a research in partnership with volunteers 
from the International Napoli Network (a for-benefit company) to identify, 
classify and understand the accessibility models used in the main international 
museums for people with disabilities, specifically examining people with ASD or 
Down’s syndrome. According to the American Alliance of Museums, over thirty 
museums in the United States have implemented proposals for these audiences, 
focused on creating spaces, visiting hours and conditions within the museum 
relating to noise factors and the non-excessive presence of other members of the 

43
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
public. The answer as to whether a museum can become accessible to people 
with cognitive and physical disabilities is somewhat ambiguous. It depends 
on the people, their interests, what the museum is offering, its spaces and 
involvement.
When implementing accessible itineraries, the classic approach is to promote 
tranquillity during a visit or create short and highly structured visits, with the 
pre-defined use of photographs and short stories. The FOQUS Foundation’s 
research involved a sample of one hundred international museums, with the 
objective of surveying what the museum was offering in terms of events and 
accessibility services. They were able to interview sixty-two museums, selecting 
eighteen museums for deeper analysis, as their inclusive and accessible activities 
were offered as mainstream museum services. 
The results of the analysis pointed out that museums were able to change 
their point of view and adapt to their visitors’ characteristics. Considering that 
museums are places with high sensorial and cultural stimulation, reducing the 
number of visitors and adjusting stimuli designed for able-bodied subjects, 
lowering sounds, lights and suchlike all together create a comfortable and 
welcoming environment for these visitors. 
4.3.4  Third phase: experimentation
The third phase was carried out in three main sub-phases: 
	– in September 2017, a first meeting was held between the MANN’s 
educational services, FOQUS Foundation managers, Argo operators and 
experts in teaching students with cognitive disorders from the Panta Rei 
Cooperative in Reggio Emilia;
	– in October, the children visited the museum with the help of Argo 
operators;
	– between October and November, the children visited the museum several 
times, in some cases they were alone, while in others, they visited the 
MANN with children from a primary school, Dalla parte dei bambini, 
guided by Argo operators and the school’s teachers.
The operators (experts, educators, teachers, pedagogists, therapists and 
cultural professionals) visited the MANN to study how the museum’s internal 
spaces are arranged and see how people organized their visits (how they 
entered, where they went and what they looked for). The experts focused 
on the changes in how the museum welcomed its visitors to see if the new 
reception methods could benefit all visitors, not only people with cognitive and 
behavioural disorders. They discussed the experimentation process and selected 
two galleries containing the Farnese Collection and the Villa of the Papyri for 
their test purpose. 

44
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
The experts studied the galleries’ features, the visitors’ behaviour, the lights, 
visitor flows and any places where the visitors could potentially stop and stay 
aside for a short time. The Farnese Collection inspired a series of new stories 
evoking the shadows of the statues on the white walls, while the Villa of the 
Papyri in Herculaneum was chosen for the dynamism and expressions of the 
dancers and runners in the room. 
4.3.5  Meeting in the museum
The direct experience of the children with disabilities (known as Argonauts) 
in the field was documented by transcribing reports on the actions carried out 
by the children and the operators observing them. The notes were used to 
understand the conversations between the operators and the children inside and 
outside the MANN. The first extract describes how a young girl, Donatella, 
suggests imitating the statues.
The operators follow her proposal and are corrected by Donatella, who 
gives precise indications. Donatella then welcomes an operator’s suggestion 
to involve other children. The museum is seen as an evocative space in itself, 
which can stimulate imagination, curiosity and amazement. Play can make a 
visit more dynamic and more attractive. It can help people with disabilities 
overcome their personal limitations and create a new idea of the museum being 
a place where, always in the respect of artwork and other visitors, children can 
enjoy themselves in new ways.
The second extract describes the experience of children (in this case, Maria 
Francesca) in selecting a subject to photograph. Following her personal logic, 
Maria Francesca independently adds other works to her initial subject, giving 
a meaning to the whole. Photography is recognized as a tool used by children 
to choose, express, communicate and observe; cameras can stimulate their 
curiosity, with more possibilities arising from potential post-production services. 
Another extract describes Alessia’s experience. She wants to listen to music 
in order to relax and focus on the Toro Farnese (the largest single sculpture from 
antiquity so far discovered) and has even chosen a song. The operators follow 
her movements around the sculpture on the notes of her chosen song, seeing her 
touching the statue, feeling it as if it was the first time. The experience is used 
to create empathy with the statue, the music helps in creating a synaesthesia of 
senses, little by little involving the senses of all present.
Several children decided to use their smartphones to photograph the 
art. After an initial visit, they started to play at finding the works they had 
photographed, using the details captured in each photograph. This micro to 
macro research helped all the participants to join an active process of value 
co-creation, as operators, children and teachers were able to help each other. 

45
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
This game was considered so important that the operators’ note stated that the 
«visitors’ involvement in this game was extraordinary».
4.4  The new activities designed during the SoStare al MANN project
The SoStare al MANN project has shown the importance of changing 
perspective in analysing the role played by a museum to cater for new audiences. 
Art has to be seen from a new, previously unapplied angle, and the interaction 
between visitors and art redefined; for example, mirrors of different shapes and 
sizes can be used to change the appearance of works of art, fragmenting them 
and letting the children reinterpret them.
At the same time, the project highlighted the opportunity to view how art 
interacts with its environment; for example, projecting the light of the torch on 
statues creates new shapes in the form of shadows. The children were able to 
re-interpret the statues using light to create new shapes. They were also asked 
to re-interpret various artefacts, including statues, through the medium of 
drawings, photographs and videos. 
The museum was able to define six different activities for its new audiences:
1.	 Change point of view;
2.	 If art is made of shadows;
3.	 From micro to macro;
4.	 Touch, move, see yourself;
5.	 Imagine the music;
6.	 SoStare (as mentioned, a play on “pausing” and “I know how to be/
behave”).
Change point of view involves asking visitors, with and without ASD, to 
alter their own visual perception of the work of art using distorting mirrors to 
fragment and rebuild them with different meanings, producing different ways 
of interacting with them.
If art is made of shadows involves re-reading artworks starting with their 
shadows and, by changing the source of light, re-invent how the item is 
perceived. 
From micro to macro used photos of details of artwork to inspire people 
to search for these details within the collections, linking and connecting the 
various pieces together.
Touch, move, see yourself was designed to create an experience where 
visitors were asked to discover the museum using all their senses, even touching 
selected exhibits.
Imagine the music uses music or voices to change the perspective of the 
various collections. 

46
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
SoStare is where the museum can identify areas where people can stay and 
interact with the other visitors, observing them from outside the visitor flows, 
slowing down their whole experience.
The children exposed to the new idea of a museum were able to develop their 
own perceptions, using all their senses; they were able to touch the works of art, 
use the background music to change their impression of the exhibitions and, 
sometimes, these new stimuli directed them towards proposing new stories.
5.  Discussion
In this paper, we studied the SoStare al MANN project, examining the 
progress of its development and implementation with the engagement of various 
actors in the local community, and highlighting the main results of the project in 
terms of letting people with autism be an active part of the museum’s audience, 
increasing the museum accessibility for people with cognitive disabilities. 
Regarding RQ1a, we found that the museum’s management was able to 
locate a third sector organization (FOQUS) within the local area and tapped 
into its competencies and into its relationships to identify, and later engage with 
a number of stakeholders, in the form of professionals, cooperatives, schools, 
children with and without a disability.
This broad approach later proved to be really useful in creating the services 
aimed for in the SoStare al MANN project, as highlighted by Mulgan93.
Moreover, this approach is consistent with previous research94 into leveraging 
external relationships to expand a project’s portfolio of expertise beyond those 
of museum staff.
At the same time, as the changing role of FOQUS highlights, their relationship 
with the museum is a way for third sector organizations to become more 
legitimate actors in the local and national environment. Non-local stakeholders 
become engaged in its work95 and, looking at how the various steps of the 
project were conducted, the project could be considered as a social innovation 
system96, giving support to RQ1b.
The project can be represented through Huq’s97 model. During the first 
phase of the project (the multi-stakeholders’ meetings), the various stakeholders 
were able to understand the problem from different perspectives; this can be 
considered similar to Huq’s first phase of entwining problems, as museum 
management entered the forum with no pre-defined agenda but as a way to obtain 
93  Mulgan 2006.
94  Papaluca, Tani 2010; Salim Saji, Ellingstad 2016.
95  Morse, Munro 2018.
96  Phillips et al. 2015; Carberry et al. 2019.
97  Huq 2019.

47
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
information, gain a broader perspective and to hear from other stakeholders 
how to deal with these issues, giving further support to both RQ1a and RQ1b.
The project then conducted a desk study to understand how other museums 
had solved the same issues in order to gain an even broader perspective. The 
results of this approach are similar to those Huq describes in the second phase of 
his model, as the various stakeholders were studying international solutions as 
a way to gain an understanding of how the various skills and expertise could be 
combined into the social innovation system that the MANN intended to create 
with this project. Similarly, the first two phases of the project are aligned with 
previous findings in literature on stakeholder management and engagement as 
a way to increase stakeholder legitimacy98.
The MANN was able to create a stable and flexible forum where various 
stakeholders were able to mediate their different approaches in order to create a 
more flexible set of solutions, which could satisfy not only the targeted audience 
of people affected by ASD, but also other audiences as well. The conclusions 
of the project, «each visitor is different from the others, since all visitors are 
bearers of a different diversity», give support to RQ2.
The MANN’s lack of previous experience on this topic in its recent history 
proved useful, as the museum’s organization was able to define new norms 
for being more accessible. In particular, the process diverged from Huq’s 
model in its third phase. In the SoStare al MANN project, the third phase was 
left in the hands of the stakeholders but, as we can see from the interviews, 
the professionals were not really driving the process, but were observing the 
other stakeholders’ behaviour and became mediators in the creation of a more 
engaging service. They were in charge of arousing the Argonauts’ interest and 
making their visits more memorable. In this way, they were able to live the 
museum from a different angle, rather than being mere spectators passively 
looking at art; this is similar to the new perspective described in museum and 
community engagement literature99.
In the SoStare al MANN project, it was the children who said how they 
would like to spend their time at the MANN and, in doing so, they came up 
with intriguing strategies and ideas that could apply to many different audiences. 
The new goal, defined during the project, was to interpret the works of art 
through the language of people with cognitive disabilities. FOQUS chose to 
engage with a heterogeneous group so as not to become entrenched in common 
prejudices whereby children with cognitive disabilities come to be excluded 
from discovering the arts. As a consequence, together they were able to define 
a tight group of activities that were valid for everyone, not only people affected 
98  Orr, Scott 2008; Vurro, Perrini 2013.
99  Solima, Tani 2016; Morse, Munro 2018.

48
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
by ASD, and were able to use their different cognitive abilities to re-read the 
collections in a new light.
The children developed the new activities, while the operators tried to 
understand the children’s real perspective, changing the way they interacted 
with them over time. The operators observed how the children touched the 
works, how they asked for background music and how they gave new identities 
to the statues. This experience was critical in discovering how to introduce 
people with cognitive and behavioural disorders to art, and how these new 
publics can become real visitors. The project was truly able to lower the barriers 
to cognitive accessibility100.
This case study has several managerial implications as well, as it highlighted 
the need to factor in accessibility from the start of a project in order to take into 
account the specific needs of the new audiences in all the museum new activities 
encompassing the curatorship of the new exhibitions, interpretation, education 
and the necessary processes of communication. 
The new services developed during the SoStare al MANN project helped to 
define a new vision of the museum where the exhibitions become a social place 
where the audience can develop their own vision, using all their senses, not just 
sight, as the new trends in museum management advise101.
At the same time, the SoStare al MANN project highlights the need and 
the difficulties of making a museum accessible to everyone. The process needs 
to become part of the routine of every member of staff and, at the same 
time, it highlights the need to create partnerships with external actors, both 
practitioners and experts. The project also highlights the possibility that, in the 
future, people with autism spectrum disorder could themselves be part of the 
museum operators or they could work as guides in some areas or galleries. In 
the past, it was felt that museums were closed to disabled people a priori; with 
this project, we can affirm the exact opposite.
Moreover, the project highlights an opportunity that only rarely has been 
caught in previous international experiences, that of making the new audiences 
an active part of the broader local community. Normally, museums try to 
address the needs of publics with cognitive and behavioural disorders by 
reducing the stimuli provided, or they introduce events that keep one public 
apart from another, such as the various nights at the museum, generally designed 
for younger visitors. The initiatives created and developed at MANN during 
the project have highlighted the possibility of the various publics visiting the 
museum at the same time, but seeing it differently, a far more ambitious project. 
The effects ensuing from the interaction between these publics will have to be 
100  Presta 2010; Solima 2012.
101  Taylor 2020.

49
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
studied to comprehend if and how this interaction can change the museum 
experience and how it is perceived, by linking it to a specific moment in time.
6.  Conclusions and further research
Over the years, museums have changed their role in society, going from 
a place of conservation to a place of continuous learning, open to everyone, 
with an emphasis on their social role. Accessibility becomes a conditio sine qua 
non for these organizations, even beyond their legal requirements. In addition, 
modern museums are meeting places, encouraging the inclusive participation of 
all visitors. The SoStare al MANN project flung open the museum’s doors to a 
new public, for the first-time welcoming people with cognitive and behavioural 
disabilities. The transition was not immediate, the museum had to work properly 
to break down its physical, economic, methodological and communication 
barriers. The SoStare al MANN project has shown the importance of engaging 
with the local community to change perspectives and become more accessible 
to some audiences. 
The project helped the various stakeholders to go beyond the mere role of 
bystanders, to redefine the very essence of several works of art, as the children 
focused on the micro-level, the detail, to link different items in new ways, at 
the macro-level. Consequently, they were able to create a new identity, new 
processes of knowledge, their eyes seeing more and finding innumerable 
similarities not usually seen and, accordingly, they become the source of a new 
vision of the potential experiences that visitors, both normal ones and those 
with cognitive disorders, may share among themselves.
This paper has several limitations. Because the study was built around an 
influential case selection process, these results cannot be generalized, as they 
are deeply embedded in the resources that the various stakeholders, MANN 
included, were able to deploy, and most are not available to smaller organizations. 
The two main results of this paper, to reiterate, are showing how to engage 
with other stakeholders to become more accessible and how to overcome the 
limitations linked to social care professionals defining the new services, with 
their role changing from decision makers to mediators. These results should 
be tested on a broader sample; or another museum more representative of a 
normal museum organization in Italy could use this project as a beacon to help 
smaller organizations create effective social innovation processes by engaging 
with their community.

50
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
References / Riferimenti bibliografici
Adler P.S., Kwon S.W., Heckscher C. (2008), Professional work: The emergence 
of collaborative community, «Organization Science», n. 19, pp. 359-376.
Alunno V. (2017), Le tecnologie multimediali per la fruizione museale e 
l’esperienza dei visitatori. Prima indagine sui Musei Civici di Palazzo 
Buonaccorsi a Macerata, «Il capitale culturale. Studies on the Value of 
Cultural Heritage, n. 15, pp. 265-295.
Anaby D., Hand C., Bradley L., Di Rezze B., Forhan M., Di Giacomo A., Law 
M. (2013), The effect of the environment on participation of children and 
youth with disabilities: a scoping review, «Disability and rehabilitation», 35, 
n. 19, pp. 1589-1598.
Askari S., Anaby D., Bergthorson M., Majnemer A., Elsabbagh M., 
Zwaigenbaum L. (2015), Participation of children and youth with autism 
spectrum disorder: a scoping review, «Review Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders», 2, n. 1, pp. 103-114.
Barnes P., McPherson G. (2019), Co-Creating, Co-producing and Connecting: 
Museum Practice Today, «Curator: The Museum Journal», 62, n. 2, pp. 
257-267.
Besozzi E. (2007), Culture in gioco e patrimoni culturali, in Progettare insieme 
per un patrimonio interculturale, edited by S. Bodo, S. Cantù, S. Mascheroni, 
Milano: Quaderni ISMU, n. 1, pp. 19-28.
Bessant J., Tidd J. (2007),  Innovation and entrepreneurship, Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons.
Bhatt P., Ahmad A.J. (2017), Financial social innovation to engage 
the economically marginalized: insights from an Indian case study, 
«Entrepreneurship & Regional Development», 29, n. 5-6, pp. 391-413.
Brodie R.J., Fehrer J.A., Jaakkola E., Conduit J. (2019), Actor engagement in 
networks: Defining the conceptual domain, «Journal of Service Research», 
22, n. 2, pp. 173-188.
Brown K., Mairesse F. (2018), The definition of the museum through its social 
role, «Curator: The Museum Journal», 61, n. 3, pp. 525-539.
Cajaiba-Santana G. (2014), Social innovation: Moving the field forward. A 
conceptual framework, «Technological Forecasting and Social Change», n. 
82, pp. 42-51.
Caldin R., Dainese R., Panciroli C. (2018), Didactics towards a bottom-up 
museum approach, «Proceedings», 1, n. 9, pp. 1-9, <https://doi.org/10.3390/
proceedings1091108>.
Carberry E.J., Bharati P., Levy D.L., Chaudhury A. (2019), Social movements 
as catalysts for corporate social innovation: Environmental activism and the 
adoption of green information systems, «Business & Society», 58, n. 5, pp. 
1083-1127.

51
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
Cattelan L. (2010), Autismo. Manuale operativo per docenti e genitori, Schio: 
Industrialzone.
Cerquetti M. (2010), Dall’economia della cultura al management per il 
patrimonio culturale: presupposti di lavoro e ricerca, «Il capitale culturale. 
Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage», n. 1, pp. 23-46.
Cetorelli G., Guido M.R (2017), Il patrimonio culturale per tutti. Fruibilità, 
riconoscibilità, accessibilità, «MIBACT Quaderni della valorizzazione», n. 
4, Ascoli Piceno: Capponi.
Clifford J. (1997), Routes. Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth 
Century, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Coffey C. (2018), Creating Inclusive Experiences in Children’s Museums for 
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder, <https://dc.uwm.edu/etd/1981/>.
Cottini L. (2009), Il bambino con autismo in classe, «Psicologia e Scuola», n. 
4, luglio/agosto, Firenze: Giunti Scuola.
Cottini L. (2016), L’autodeterminazione nelle persone con disabilità: percorsi 
educativi per svilupparla, Trento: Edizioni Centro Studi Erickson.
Cottini L., Vivanti G. (2016), Autismo: come e cosa fare con bambini e ragazzi 
a scuola, Firenze: GiuntiEdu.
Da Milano C., Sciacchitano E. (2015), Linee guida per la comunicazione nei 
musei: segnaletica interna, didascalie e pannelli, «MIBACT Quaderni della 
valorizzazione», n. 1, Ascoli Piceno: Capponi.
Dacin P., Dacin T., Matear M. (2010), Social Entrepreneurship: Why We Don’t 
Need a New Theory and How We Move Forward From Here, «Academy of 
Management Perspectives», 24, n. 3, pp. 37-57.
De Luca M. (2007), Comunicazione ed educazione museale, Milano: Franco 
Angeli.
Dees J.G. (1998), The Meaning of Social Entrepreneurship, Stanford University, 
working paper.
Dodd J., Sandell R., Coles A. (1998), Building bridges: Guidance for museums 
and galleries on developing new audiences, London: Museums & Galleries 
Commission.
Edwards-Schachter M., Wallace M.L. (2017), Shaken, but not stirred: Sixty 
years of defining social innovation, «Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change», n. 119, pp. 64-79.
Ferraro V. (2011), Restyling museum role and activities: European best practices 
toward a new strategic fit, «Il capitale culturale. Studies on the Value of 
Cultural Heritage», n. 2, pp. 133-177.
Gladwin T.N., Krause T.S., Kennelly J.J. (1995), Beyond eco-efficiency: 
Towards socially sustainable business, «Sustainable Development», 3, n. 1, 
pp. 35-43.
Hall J., Vredenburg H. (2003), The challenge of innovating for sustainable 
development, «MIT Sloan Management Review», 45, n. 1, p. 61.

52
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
Harding R. (2004), Social Enterprise: The New Economic Engine?, «Business 
Strategy Review», 15, n. 4, pp. 40-43.
Harrisson D., Chaari N., Comeau-Vallée M. (2012), Intersectoral alliance and 
social innovation: When corporations meet civil society, «Annals of Public 
and Cooperative Economics», 83, n. 1, pp. 1-24.
Hein H. (2006), Public art: Thinking museums differently, Lanham: Altamira 
Press.
Hennink M.M., Hutter I., Bailey A. (2011), Qualitative research methods, 
London: Sage Publications.
Howaldt J., Schwarz M. (2010), Social Innovation: Concepts, research fields 
and international trends, Dortmund: Sozialforschungsstelle.
Howes D. (1991), The Varieties of Sensual Experience: a sourcebook in the 
anthropology of the senses, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Huq J.L. (2019), Conditioning a professional exchange field for social 
innovation, «Business & Society», 58, n. 5, pp. 1047-1082.
Ianes D., Cramerotti S. (2002), Comportamenti problema e alleanze 
psicoeducative: strategie di intervento per la disabilità mentale e l’autismo, 
Trento: Edizioni Centro Studi Erickson.
Ianes D., Zappella M. (2009), L’autismo: aspetti clinici e interventi 
psicoeducativi, Trento: Edizioni Centro Studi Erickson.
ICOM (2009), La funzione educativa del museo e del patrimonio culturale: 
una risorsa per promuovere conoscenze, abilità e comportamenti generatori 
di fruizione consapevole e cittadinanza attiva, ICOM Italia – Commissione 
Educazione 
e 
Mediazione, 
<http://www.infologsrl.it/wp-content/
uploads/2015/02/LA-FUNZIONE-EDUCATIVA-DEL-MUSEO.pdf>, 
22.03.2021.
Kulik T.K., Fletcher T.S. (2016), Considering the museum experience of 
children with autism, «Curator: The Museum Journal», 59, n. 1, pp. 27-38.
Lawrence T.B., Dover G., Gallagher B. (2014), Managing social innovation, in 
The Oxford handbook of innovation management, edited by M. Dodgson, 
D.M. Gann, N. Phillips, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 316-334. 
Lazzeretti L., Sartori A., Innocenti N. (2015), Museums and social media: the 
case of the Museum of Natural History of Florence, «International Review 
on Public and Nonprofit Marketing», 12, n. 3, pp. 267-283.
Lettice F., Parekh M. (2010), The social innovation process: themes, challenges 
and implications for practice,  «International Journal of Technology 
Management», 51, n. 1, pp. 139-158.
Levent N., Pascual-Leone A., eds. (2014), The multisensory museum: Cross-
disciplinary perspectives on touch, sound, smell, memory, and space, 
Lenham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Lipparini A. (2002), La gestione strategica del capitale intellettuale e del capitale 
sociale, Bologna: Il Mulino. 

53
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
Lusch R.F., Vargo S.L. (2014), Service-dominant logic: Premises, perspectives, 
possibilities, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mariotto F.L., Zanni P.P., Moraes G.H.S. (2014), What is the use of a single-case 
study in management research?, «Revista de Administração de Empresas», 
54, n. 4, pp. 358-369.
Martins C. (2012), Museum audio guides as an accessibility enhancer, in 
Accesibilidad en la nueva era de las comunicaciones Profesionales y 
universidad: un diálogo imprescindible, edited by C. Álvarez de Morales, C. 
Limbach, M. Olalla Luque, Granada: Tragacanto, pp. 101-115.
McKelvey M., Zaring O. (2018), Co-delivery of social innovations: exploring 
the university’s role in academic engagement with society, «Industry and 
Innovation», 25, n. 6, pp. 594-611.
Morse N., Munro E. (2018), Museums’ community engagement schemes, 
austerity and practices of care in two local museum services, «Social & 
Cultural Geography», 19, n. 3, pp. 357-378.
Moussouri T. (2007), Implications of the social model of disability for visitor 
research, «Visitor Studies», 10, n. 1, pp. 90-106.
Mulgan G. (2006), The Process of Social Innovation, «Innovations: Technology, 
Governance, Globalization», 1, n. 2, pp. 145-162.
Mulgan G., Tucker S., Rushanara A., Sanders B. (2007), Social Innovation: 
What It Is, Why It Matters and How It Can Be Accelerated, London: Young 
Foundation, Oxford Said Business School.
Mumford M.D. (2002), Social innovation: ten cases from Benjamin Franklin, 
«Creativity research journal», 14, n. 2, pp. 253-266.
Murray R., Caulier-Grice J., Mulgan G. (2010), The open book of social 
innovation, London: National endowment for science, technology and the 
art.
Noci G., Verganti R. (1999), Managing green product innovation in small 
firms, «R&D Management», 29, n. 1, pp. 3-15.
Onciul B. (2013), Community engagement, curatorial practice, and museum 
ethos in Alberta, in Museums and communities: Curators, collections and 
collaboration, edited by V. Golding, W. Modest, London: Bloomsbury, pp. 
79-97.
Orr R.J., Scott W.R. (2008), Institutional exceptions on global projects: A 
process model, «Journal of International Business Studies», 39, n. 4, pp. 
562-588.
Papaluca O., Tani M. (2010), Stakeholder Relationships Management: Effects 
on Strategy Definition in Social Enterprises-Some Evidences from a Fair 
Trade Organization in Naples (October 11, 2010), available at SSRN: 
<https://ssrn.com/abstract=1690520> 
or 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.1690520>, 22.03.2021.
Paton R. (2003), Managing and Measuring Social Enterprises, London: Sage.

54
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
Phills J.A., Deiglmeier K., Miller D.T. (2008), Rediscovering social innovation, 
«Stanford Social Innovation Review», Fall 2008, pp. 34-43.
Phillips W., Lee H., Ghobadian A., O’Regan N., James P. (2015), Social 
innovation and social entrepreneurship: A systematic review, «Group & 
Organization Management», 40, n. 3, pp. 428-461.
Pinna G. (2000), Il ruolo socio-culturale dei musei scientifici, «Museologia 
Scientifica», 16, n. 1, pp. 1-19.
Pol E., Ville S. (2009), Social innovation: Buzz word or enduring term?, «The 
Journal of socio-economics», 38, n. 6, pp. 878-885.
Purtik H., Arenas D. (2019), Embedding social innovation: Shaping societal 
norms and behaviors throughout the innovation process, «Business & 
Society», 58, n. 5, pp. 963-1002.
Presta I. (2010), Non-visitors: who are they, why is it important to know them?, 
«Cadmo», n. 1, pp. 49-61.
Rappolt-Schlichtmann G., Daley S.G. (2013), Providing access to engagement 
in learning: The potential of Universal Design for Learning in museum 
design, «Curator: The Museum Journal», 56, n. 3, pp. 307-321.
Rahman M., Bose S., Babu M.M., Dey B.L., Roy S.K., Binsardi B. (2019), 
Value co-creation as a dialectical process: Study in Bangladesh and Indian 
Province of West Bengal, «Information Systems Frontiers», 21, n. 3, pp. 
527-545.
Rodari P. (2005), Apprendere al museo. La costruzione del sapere come attività 
sociale, «Journal of Science Communication», 4, n. 3, pp. 1-5.
Ruiz C., Parra C. (2013), New forms of organization in knowledge-based 
societies: Social innovation, in  Non-profit Organizations and Social 
Entrepreneurship, New York: Routledge.
Salim Saji B.S., Ellingstad P. (2016), Social innovation model for business 
performance and innovation, «International Journal of Productivity and 
Performance Management», 65, n. 2, pp. 256-274.
Sciarelli M., Tani M. (2013), Network approach and stakeholder management, 
«Business Systems Review», 2, n. 2, pp. 175-190.
Seawright J., Gerring J. (2008), Case selection techniques in case study 
research: A menu of qualitative and quantitative options, «Political research 
quarterly», 61, n. 2, pp. 294-308.
Singer S. (2000), The social role of museums in contemporary society. Evaluation 
as a tool, in Pensare, Valutare, Ri-pensare. La mediazione culturale nei 
musei, edited by E. Nardi, Milano: FrancoAngeli, pp. 345-353.
Solima L. (2004), L’impresa culturale, Roma: Carocci Editore.
Solima L. (2012), Il museo in ascolto. Nuove strategie di comunicazione per i 
musei statali, Catanzaro: Rubbettino.
Solima L. (2015), I musei e la progettazione partecipata. L’esperienza dei musei 
nazionali di Lucca in un contesto multiculturale, «Il capitale culturale. 
Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage», n. 12, pp. 955-977.

55
SOCIAL INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY IN MUSEUM
Solima L. (2017), Museums, accessibility and audience development, in Bridging 
theories, strategies and practices in valuing cultural heritage, edited by M. 
Cerquetti, Macerata: eum, pp. 225-240.
Solima L. (2018), Management per l’impresa culturale, Roma: Carocci.
Solima L., Amirante F., De Vivo C., Molino L. (2019), Attraverso gli occhi 
degli altri: un progetto di accessibilità per il MANN, «Il capitale culturale. 
Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage», n. 9, pp. 307-332.
Solima L., Giulierini P. (2018), Quando il museo diventa impresa culturale: il 
Piano Strategico del Mann, Naples: Electa Editore.
Solima L., Tani M. (2016), Do Not Touch! How 3d Printing can open the 
way to an accessible museum, Referred Electronic Conference Proceeding 
del XXVIII Convegno annuale di Sinergie, pp. 523-533.
Suchy S. (2006), Museum management: emotional value and community 
engagement, in New Roles and Missions of Museums, INTERCOM 2006 – 
International Committee for Museum Management 2006 Symposium, edited 
by Chinese Association of Museums, International Council of Museums, pp. 
1-10.
Taylor J.K. (2020), The Art Museum Redefined: Power, Opportunity, and 
Community Engagement, London: Springer Nature.
Tracey P., Stott N. (2017), Social innovation: a window on alternative ways of 
organizing and innovating, «Innovation», 19, n. 1, pp. 51-60.
United Nations (2007), Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 
New York: United Nations.
Van der Have R.P., Rubalcaba L. (2016), Social innovation research: An 
emerging area of innovation studies?, «Research Policy», 45, n. 9, pp. 1923-
1935.
van Wijk J., Zietsma C., Dorado S., De Bakker F.G., Marti I. (2018), Social 
innovation: Integrating micro, meso, and macro level insights from 
institutional theory, «Business & Society», 58, n. 5, pp. 887-918.
Vurro C., Perrini F. (2013), La valutazione degli impatti sociali: approcci e 
strumenti applicativi, Milano: EGEA.
Walters D. (2009), Approaches in museums towards disability in the United 
Kingdom and the United States, «Museum Management and Curatorship», 
24, n. 1, pp. 29-46.
Watson S., ed. (2007), Museums and their Communities, New York: Routledge.
Westley F., Antadze N. (2010), Making a difference: Strategies for scaling social 
innovation for greater impact, «Innovation Journal», 15, n. 2, pp. 1-19.
Yin R.K. (2017), Case study research and applications: Design and methods, 
London: Sage publications.
Ziegler R. (2017), Social innovation as a collaborative concept, «Innovation: 
The European Journal of Social Science Research», 30, n. 4, pp. 388-405.

56
LUDOVICO SOLIMA, MARIO TANI, PASQUALE SASSO
Zietsma C.E., Groenewegen P., Logue D., Hiningspurtik C.R. (2017), Field or 
fields? Building the scaffolding for cumulation of research on institutional 
fields, «Academy of Management Annals», n. 11, pp. 391-450.

eum  edizioni università di macerata
JOURNAL OF THE DIVISION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE 
Department of Education, Cultural Heritage and Tourism  
University of Macerata
Direttore / Editor in-chief
Pietro Petraroia
Co-direttori / Co-editors
Tommy D. Andersson, University of Gothenburg, Svezia
Elio Borgonovi, Università Bocconi di Milano
Rosanna Cioffi, Seconda Università di Napoli
Stefano Della Torre, Politecnico di Milano
Michela di Macco, Università di Roma “La Sapienza”
Daniele Manacorda, Università degli Studi di Roma Tre
Serge Noiret, European University Institute
Tonino Pencarelli, Università di Urbino “Carlo Bo”
Angelo R. Pupino, Università degli Studi di Napoli L'Orientale
Girolamo Sciullo, Università di Bologna
Texts by
Nicodemo Abate, Nicola Albergo, Gianpaolo Angelini, Giulia Beatrice,
Giacomo Becattini, William Cortes Casarrubios, Tiziano Casola, Mara Cerquetti, 
Matteo Cristofaro, Stefano De Falco, Alfredo Del Monte, Alice Devecchi, 
Luigi Di Cosmo, Tamara Dominici, Patrizia Dragoni, Selene Frascella, 
Luciana Lazzeretti, Luna Leoni, Lauro Magnani, Chiara Mannoni, 
Giovanni Messina, Sara Moccia, Andrea Morelli, Umberto Moscatelli, 
Sharon Palumbo, Luca Pennacchio, Andrea Penso, Pietro Petraroia, Gaia Pignocchi, 
Federico Saccoccio, Pasquale Sasso, Giovanna Segre, Ludovico Solima, 
Mario Tani, Roberta Tucci 
http://riviste.unimc.it/index.php/cap-cult/index 
ISSN 2039-2362

