A new decade 
for social changes
9
772668
779000
ISSN 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com
Vol. 35, 2022

 
 
 
 
 
 
The accessibility of visually impaired people to museums and 
art through ICTs 
Paraskevi Vasilakou1, Sofia Mineiko2, Theopisti Marina Hasioti3, Zoe 
Gavriilidou4, Athanasios Drigas5 
1 2 3 5Net Media Lab Mind - Brain R&D ΙΙΤ - N.C.S.R. "Demokritos", Athens, Greece, 
1 2 3 4Democritus University of Thrace 
paravasi1@helit.duth.gr, sofimine@helit.duth.gr, theopistichasioti@gmail.com, 
zgabriil@helit.duth.gr, dr@iit.demokritos.gr 
Abstract. Human’s involvement with culture is a vital part of his life, but what happens when 
someone is blind or visually impaired (VI) and how Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) help the access to cultural locations? The difficulties and limitations that 
blind and visually impaired (BVI) persons face while visiting museums or art exhibitions are of 
high importance. These limitations concern both the access to the location and the perception of 
the exhibits. This bibliographic research is divided into four main parts. In the first part of our 
paper we will analyze the difficulties that these people face as visitors in art exhibitions and how 
their disabilities affect an autonomous visit. Afterwards, we will refer to the importance of the 
disability arts when combined with ICTs. In the next part, we will mention the projects that are 
already applied or those for which efforts have been made globally for their implementation. 
These will be accompanied by recorded feedback from blind and visually impaired visitors. 
Finally, we will make a scheduled visit to the Tactual Museum of Athens in order to collect 
material on practices used in their exhibition and we shall record reactions from visually impaired 
visitors.  
Keywords. Museums, art, ICTs, visually impaired 
Introduction  
Blind and visually impaired people have long been excluded from artistic and cultural 
institutions such as art exhibitions and museums. Despite the growing concern and efforts that 
have been made in the last years, the majority of these institutions are still inaccessible to 
disabled people. As a result, “only 5.5 percent of blind and visually impaired people visit 
museums in Europe” [1].This is partially due to the visual centricity of these institutions [1] 
which creates barriers for visitors with visual impairments and deters their motivation to gain 
knowledge and socialize with their friends and family [2] in such spaces and contexts. In this 
article, which is based on bibliographic research, we aim to analyze firstly the lack of 
accessibility experienced by blind and visually impaired people in cultural institutions such as 
museums.   
Today, new technologies can be used to address inaccessibility and create inclusive 
practices in the fields of Arts and Culture. The integration of Information and Communication 
263
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
Technologies (ICTs) in these fields offers the possibility to enhance access to artists and 
audiences that were until now excluded from artistic and cultural institutions [3]. For at least a 
decade, disabled artists have used ICTs in their creative processes. Our second section will 
focus on them and on the Disability Arts. Lastly, we will discuss and offer an overview of 
current practices using new technologies implemented by museums and art galleries in order to 
enhance accessibility for blind and visually impaired audiences. To conclude this final section, 
we will present some of the feedback that has been given by blind and visually impaired patrons 
concerning these practices.  
 
Ι. Implications of the visual nature of art exhibitions and museums for Blind and 
visually impaired people 
Ocularly-centered museums: Which are the difficulties blind and visually impaired 
patrons face? 
As it is known, people with disabilities rarely visit museums due to mobility issues in 
reaching and navigating museum buildings and difficulties in accessing artworks [4]. This is 
because the museums remain mostly ocular centric oriented, which does not contribute to the 
engagement with exhibitions through other senses than vision, deprives their access to 
information and exhibits, and also hinders their independent mobility in the museum space [5]. 
Proper experience of an exposition for these people could only be available by approaching the 
exhibits literally in a hands-on fashion. In most cases, however, such direct contact with them 
is not possible due to the risk of damage. [6]  
According to the social model, disability is not a product of pathology, but of specific 
social and economic structures that exclude people with disabilities from fully participating in 
mainstream social activities. In other words, the social model tried to introduce a new point of 
view regarding the impairments and difficulties turning the attention to the social barriers. [7].  
The common feeling that the museum experience is mainly visual is by itself the main 
problem for the people who do not have access to the world's visual culture [8]. 
Hayhoe in his book claims that the VI persons are passively excluded from the museums 
without anyone taking into consideration their age and types of blindness. Subsequently, the 
understanding of blindness or visual impairment (the meaning of which differ depending on the 
apperceptions of each person and the cultural environment) will eventually lead us to to 
understand how these people perceive art. Dealing with art and cultural elements will eventually 
help them to strengthen their self-esteem and built a relationship with the past [1]. Candlin states 
that museums can include low-vision audience if they want to change how their exhibits are 
presented and claims that the VI persons are not treated as marginal group because of their low 
vision or its total absence, but because the opinion that the art is perceived only through the 
eyes, is still very strong [1]. 
Blind and visually impaired (BVI) persons tend to feel insecure in unfamiliar 
environments due to the uncertainty of the environmental context. So imagine how an ocularly-
centered museum impacts on their psychology as visitors even upon their entering. Mobility 
barriers and the lack of accessible information, whose content usually includes visual 
descriptive terminology has a negative influence on them [1]. The absence of information 
(tactile information) that can be obtained through senses other than sight can reduce the quality 
of their visit [8].  
 A survey in United Kingdom focusing on best access practices of museums’ websites 
proved that 81% of accredited museums in UK provided information regarding the accessibility 
264
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
of the museum site through their website. However, these information was not sufficient for the 
VI people to plan an independent visit [1].  
We need to understand the necessity and the importance of giving visually disabled 
patrons the opportunity to feel and understand art through their senses. If we do not take into 
consideration the cultural needs of these people and assist for their integration, that will result 
into burdening them with high costs in order to be hire escort assistance, which may gradually 
result to their exclusion from museum visits and other culturally relevant activities, because of 
the high financial cost [8].  The financial constraints that BVI people face are multidimensional 
and affect important sectors of their lives.  The high cost of the special equipment they needed 
in order to have access to everyday things and services based on their needs, along with the lack 
of social support and sufficiently trained staff is also a sector we cannot overlook and it is 
important to come up with a solution. Most of the times the assisting staff provides services 
which do not meet the real needs of these people.[8].  
 Although, contemporary art is still evolving and the gradual development of 
multisensory technologies will give to BVI persons the ability to appreciate art through various 
senses (eg. hearing, touch and smell) and pave the way for quality cultural experiences through 
the life-enhancing power of art [8]. 
 
Lack of independence  
The lack of independence when visiting cultural and artistic institutions is a great 
consequence of the barriers that blind and visually impaired visitors face. People with visual 
impairments often have to rely on their families and/or friends to visit museums and art 
exhibitions. During their research, S. Asakawa, Ahmetovic, Guerreiro, Kitan and C. Asakawa 
found that fourteen out of nineteen participants had never visited a museum by themselves. 
Those who had visited museums by themselves were assisted by museum escorts or had attented 
specialized tours for blind and visually impaired people.  Therefore, their ability to visit these 
spaces is highly dependent on the assistance they receive either from their families/friends or 
from the museum personnel, and their availability [9]:  
““I depend too much on them [their family and friends], but if there were specialized 
services in the museums, I could make arrangements by myself” [10], and “I don’t want to make 
an appointment three weeks ahead” [1] 
Yet it is important for blind and visually impaired people to have more control and 
autonomy over their museum experience, in the same way that non-disabled people do. 
Naturally, lack of independence strongly impacts the quality of their experiences in those 
cultural and artistic institutions, firstly because the quality of the description is highly dependent 
on the person providing them [2,9]: 
“It depends on who you go with. Some people are very expressive and they are very 
descriptive. But other people are...not really giving me much...They don’t know exactly what I 
wanna know.”  [9] 
Secondly, because they are often dependent on personnel who are not trained to receive 
a disabled audience and they may thereby be exposed to ableist and unwelcoming behaviors. 
[1] 
Art and technology alike can play an important role in creating access to worlds that are 
otherwise unavailable for blind and visually impaired people [11]. We will now focus on how 
disabled artists exercise agency, particularly through the use of technology [11]. 
 
 
265
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
ΙΙ. Disability Arts using ICT and digital technology  
Disability Arts  
Through their artistic and creative practices, disabled artists have – sometimes 
unwillingly – opposed to the medical model of disability that emphasizes and perpetuates a 
passive image of individuals with disabilities. Hence, according to Sarah Heussaff, disability 
arts are socially and politically engaged [12]. According to Swain and French: 
“Through song lyrics, poetry, writing drama and so on, disabled people have celebrated 
difference and rejected the ideology of normality in which disabled people are devalued as 
'abnormal.' They are creating images of strength and pride, the antithesis of dependency and 
helplessness (2000)” [13] 
Disability Arts have played an important role in expressing a positive disability identity 
[13] and thus in the individual and collective empowerment of disabled persons. As Walker 
described in 1998 during the National Arts and Disability Center online conference, Disability 
Arts have strongly impacted Disability Culture, which:  
“is made up of artists who are not trying to pass, artists who don't buy into societies [sic] 
rule that we should be ashamed of our disabilities, artists who often show in their art a self-
acceptance and a pride about who they are, not in spite of a disability, not because of a disability, 
but including a disability.” [13] 
Therefore, according to Heussaff, disability arts are also practices that enhance self-
representation and self-organization [12]. 
For at least a decade, disabled artists have been using new technologies in their artistic 
and creative processes and they have widely contributed in the field of Digital Arts. For Al 
Zidjaly, art combined with technology may represent an opportunity for disabled people to 
create not only personal but also social change (2011). In this section we want to point out that 
ICTs can be and are being used by disabled actors themselves in order to create art that is both 
for disabled and non-disabled audiences, but also in order to enhance accessibility. By 
combining art with technologies, disabled artists are exploring multimodal artistic practices and 
they create their own creative and inclusive aesthetics.  In spite of society’s perception of artists, 
they are proving that “great art can be created or interpreted with senses other than our eyes” 
[14].  
We will now offer a brief overview of blind and visually impaired artists who use ICTs 
in their artistic and creative processes.  
 
Overview of blind and visually impaired artists  
Keith Salmon and The Oregon Project  
Keith Salmon is a landscape blind artist who uses sound recordings. For him, “painting 
isn’t about capturing what a place looks like but how it feels” [14]. Thus, in his work he tries to 
convey parts of his experience: “the cold, the shimmery light, the wind” [14]. 
In 2016, Salmon collaborated with Microsoft on the “Oregon Project”, an interactive 
audio-visual experience that used proxemic audio to interpret two-dimensional images. During 
the exhibition, four Kinects and fifteen overhead speakers that played a total of 54 soundtracks 
were installed in order to produce an acoustic and spatial interpretation of Salmon’s paintings 
[15]. The aim of the installation was to create a holistic personal experience of the artworks for 
people both with and without vision impairments. The paintings, which depict the remote Hells 
Canyon, are brought to life through the different sounds that are triggered by the Kinects’ track 
of movements:  
266
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
“From afar, observers can hear birdsong, rushing water and grass swishing in the wind 
— recorded in Hells Canyon by Salmon and his collaborators. Moving closer activates digital 
tones matched to Salmon’s palette of blue, green, brown and ochre. Stand even closer and you 
can hear Salmon working in his studio as he scribbles pastels on paper, in an experience that 
parallels how a sighted person can see details when leaning in. The Kinects also track hand 
waves to change what you hear, helping observers become part of the piece and make their own 
acoustic mixes with movement. At the exhibit, adults triggered sounds primarily by walking, 
while kids jumped and waved their arms to produce a different blend of noise.” [15] 
 
 
Figure 1: “Artist Keith Salmon, left, and Microsoft researcher Neel Joshi stand in front of 
“The Oregon Project” at the King Street Station in Seattle. Photos by Dan DeLong” [15] 
 
Hal Lasko, “The pixel painter” 
Hal Lasko, also known as “The Pixel Painter”, was a typographer and an artist who suffered 
from wet macular degeneration that caused him blindness in the center of his vision. Lasko 
created his art pieces on his computer using Microsoft Paint, a program that, thanks to “it’s easy 
interface and pixel precision allowed Hal to journey down a new artistic path with a style many 
consider “retro cool” (https://thepixelpainter.com/).  
267
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: “Red October” by Hal Lasko 
 
ΙΙΙ. Increasing access for blind and visually impaired museum visitors: an overview 
of current practices.   
Visually impaired people have difficulty in visiting museums. For this reason, various 
researchers have tried to find solutions through ICTs so that these people have equal rights and 
do not feel excluded from social and artistic activities. 
 
(a) 
Augmented Reality, the Mobile App MusA and 3D printings  
The first tool of Information and Communication Technologies which has been used is 
the Augmented Reality (AR) and the ways it can help people with visual impairments or 
blindness to navigate in a museum. The researchers try to discover and analyze the ways in 
which AR could facilitate the access of visually impaired or blind people in the museums and 
the construction of positive experiences. In the process two questions have arisen and they are 
relevant to how the museums could create inclusive and accessible spaces for visually impaired 
or blind individuals. As for AR there is no a standardized definition. The most used one refers 
to different virtually mediated environments and virtual reality technologies. Some researchers 
characterized it as a “mixed reality” because it is in the middle of completely virtual 
environments and completely real world. The AR technology is accessible through mobile 
applications and it can provide either updated information of satellites or static ones of a specific 
location or object. In particularly, AR combines audio, haptic, gustatory and olfactory 
information through verbal descriptions, AR Avatars etc., which could help these people to 
create a picture of what is presented. As far as affordances it concerns, the researchers refer to 
a combination of eight properties: authenticity, collaborative affordance, connectivity, student 
centered, community, exploring situation, sharing knowledge and multisensory. All these 
properties can help visually impaired or blind people to have access at auditory information 
about the surrounding space and therefore they can easily navigate in it. The researchers, also, 
engaged in the thematic analysis which was conducted in the terms of the research. From this 
analysis four themes emerged: 
 
268
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
Stage of development 
How Are Disabled People Involved in the Research? 
The (Potential) Impact of AR on User Experience 
Fun and Enjoyment/Function, Not Fun 
It is shown that significant steps have been made in order virtual impaired of blind 
people have access to museums through Augmented Reality. This could help them to acquire 
positive experiences and knowledge [16]. Furthermore, the second tool is an inclusive mobile 
app MusA which aims to assist people with low vision to have access to the museums and their 
artworks. This app contributes to this supporting LV people in accessing 2D visual artworks, 
such as paintings, through interactive artwork descriptions in Augmented Reality. Although 
some questions have arisen during the development of MusA however it was shown that this 
app is effective in supporting people with LV during artwork accessibility. More specifically, 
the participants were able to easily frame the target artworks with their mobile device camera, 
to access the visual feedback provided in AR and also to interact with the visual information 
shown in AR. In order this app to work, the “Associazione Nazionale Subvedenti” (ANS) used 
the methodology of DescriVedendo descriptions of the artworks. The analysis focused on 
addressing the problem of how museum visitors can access DescriVedendo during a visit 
resulting in the following requirements: 1. It should be accessible from visitors’ own devices. 
2. It should be accessible to people with LV. 3. It should help the user quickly fnd descriptions. 
4. It should help the user navigate the description. 5. It should augment descriptions with visual 
information. 6. It should work in multiple museums, for all artworks with DescriVedendo 
descriptions. At the end the researchers set as future goal to make MusA available to iOS and 
Android users and to include DescriVedendo descriptions that are currently available for 
artworks exposed in 8 museums [4]. 
In addition to the previous technologies, some software was created in order to serve the 
needs of these people. So, the researchers propose some guidelines in order to create a 
framework for improving the museum experience and access of blind and low vision individuals 
[5]. Firstly, they analyze some tools which are used to help people with blindness or low vision 
to have access at the museums. Some of these tools are: 1. Geomagic Touch System, which 
helps these people to explore 3D virtual copies of museum artworks by touching them. 2. The 
Probos Sensory Console with which the blind or low visual persons have the opportunity not 
only to touch virtual 3D objects but also to hear sounds which were related to them. 3. Tooteko 
which provides a tactile exploration of the exhibits by wearing a ring sensor. 4. Blind Museum 
Tourer which was designed for the Tactual Museum of the Lighthouse for the Blind of Greece, 
the National Archaeological Museum and the Acropolis Museum and it was used for physical 
access and indoor navigation. Furthermore, the researchers conducted a research in order to see 
how the visual impaired or blind people want to enhance their access at the museums. So, at 
this research semi-structured interviews were used to collect the data and 72 individuals 
voluntarily participated in. From these the 61,1% were blind and the 38,9% had low vision. The 
participants considered that in order to have an easier access to the museums and their artworks, 
they should proceed with 3 phases: pre-visit, on-site visit and post-visit. At the end, the proposed 
framework does not intend to replace the accessible guided tours but to use technology in order 
to allow people with low vision or blindness to have easier access to museums and their exhibits. 
Finally, as a last medium to help people with vision problems is 3D printings. These 
people in order to “see” the exposition need to use their hands, but this is not possible because 
damage can be caused. For this reason, museums tried to create “touchable” models of the 
exhibits. To so, they used the method of 3Dprinting. This, however, has one disadvantage. They 
269
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
cannot reproduce precisely the model as it is in reality. More specifically some steps need to be 
made in order to prepare an exhibition through 3D printing. These steps are eight: 1. Selection 
of the objects, 2. Selection of the 3D scanning technology, 3. Preparation of the documentation, 
4. 3D scanning, 5. Postprocessing, 6. 3D printing, 7. 3D print processing and 8. Preparation of 
the exposition. Moreover, the researchers present the implementation of the above steps for the 
construction of an exhibition with sculptures from the mid-20th century. At the first stage, the 
museum’s staff selected 10 sculptures from the exhibition. At the second stage, they assessed 
the dimensions and shape of the sculptures in terms of scanning technology. The objects that 
used for scanning were mobile scanners which were facilitating the process. However, the 
precision of the scanning was too low so that the museum’s staff was obliged to use additional 
markers in order to have the desirable result. At a later stage the staff indicated special features 
of the objects, which were significant for the preservation of the nature of the exhibition. These 
features were noted in order to ensure that they were properly displayed during 3D printing. 
Moreover, research was carried out at the headquarters of Polish Association of the Blind in 
Lublin and it was expected that a visual impaired or blind person to recognize the 3D printed 
sculpture without any additional information about it. Thus, the aim was to check the possibility 
of recognizing the exhibit, to assess the correctness of the 3D size of copies and to assess the 
suitability of the material used for 3D printing [6]. 
 
(b) 
Audio description and assistive navigation  
The barriers that blind and visually impaired visitors may face inside museum spaces 
are often related to the inaccessibility of the exhibition objects and artworks, as well as to 
mobility issues such as navigation and orientation [2,17,9,1]. For these reasons, among the most 
common technological solutions provided by museums to enhance accessibility for blind and 
visually impaired patrons there are audio guides that offer verbal descriptions of the exhibited 
items and indoor navigation systems [9,1]. 
“Besides helping to create new ways for visually impaired and blind visitors to interact 
with museum collections while learning more about them, technology is also being used to 
provide them better physical access, indoor navigation and wayfinding in those environments, 
enhancing their ability to move independently through different galleries, without the aid of 
guides or another escort.” [1] 
In addition to this, accurate navigation assistance of blind and visually impaired visitors 
is important since, as observed by Asakawa et al, they value listening to audio content while 
they are in front of the respective artworks and not just near them (2019). Thus, many museums 
have developed systems that combine audio description of the exhibitions and accurate 
navigation services. We will now offer a brief overview of these hybrid solutions.  
Blind MuseumTourer, Tactual Museum of the Lighthouse for the Blind (Greece)  
The Blind MuseumTourer is an application that runs on Android phones and uses 
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacons and tactile floor tiles in order to accurately locate visitors 
and help them navigate independently within the museum environment [17,9]. It was developed 
by Meliones and Sampson for Greek museums and it was firstly implemented at the Tactual 
Museum in collaboration with the Lighthouse for the Blind of Greece [17].  The application is 
initiated through voice command or by tapping on the screen. In the main menu (figure a) 
visitors can find vocal presentations of possible routes they can take, as well as emergency and 
back options. System interactions were based on a single-tap for hearing a selection, double-tap 
for confirming, or through voice command. Selecting a route initiates the self-guided tour and 
when exhibits are approached by the visitor the application launches a description. [17,1] 
270
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Blind MuseumTourer Android application activities: (a) Main menu and Route 
selection (b) Emergency; (c) Get voice way-finding instructions to move to the 
WC/canteen/exit. 
 
National Science Center of New Delhi (India)  
At the National Science Center in New Delhi another mobile device was developed in order 
to enhance accessibility for blind and visually impaired patrons. Users of this device have the 
option of selecting vocally their destination and are then presented with step-by-step 
navigational audio instructions while they are walking.  “When the visitor is near an exhibit, an 
infrared tag is received by the device and a description of the piece is presented” [1].  
 
 
Figure 4: Picture of a visitor navigating with the application’s help at the National Science 
Center of New Delhi 
 
271
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
Andy Warhol Museum, Pittsburgh (USA/ Adena’s, Hopewell’s, and Monongahela’s 
Territories)  
In order to support and facilitate both navigation within the museums and accessibility 
of the exhibits, Asakawa et al. developed a smartphone app with two interaction modes: 
Navigation and Art Appreciation. The activation of each mode depends exclusively on the 
user’s location and orientation (2019). Thus, the application uses BLE beacons and the 
smartphone’s sensors to accurately localize the user [9] 
“During Navigation Mode, users receive turn-by-turn instructions to proceed in the 
intended path while being alerted about the artworks they are passing by. Art Appreciation 
Mode is activated when the users are next to an artwork and turn their body in order to face it, 
while Navigation Mode is resumed after turning their body to the previous orientation. When 
the user is within close proximity of an artwork, changing between modes depends on the user’s 
orientation.” [9] 
 
 
Figure 5: “It shows the interaction between Navigation and Art Appreciation modes based on 
the user’s location and orientation, with example audio feedback and screenshots of each 
mode” [9]. 
 
In order to evaluate their application, the researchers installed the system at The Andy 
Warhol Museum in Pittsburg and conducted a user study following nine blind and visually 
impaired participants. During their research, Asakawa et al. found that the quality of the audio 
content is a crucial factor in the experience that blind and visually impaired patrons have within 
cultural and artistic institutions. Thus, the audio content that was used for this study was created 
by the museum’s personnel when designing their inclusive audio guide, OutLoud – which 
supports auditory descriptions, but not navigation [9]. Also, the application gives the possibility 
272
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
to the user to navigate through the audio content by performing gestures on the touchscreen: 
“for instance, a single tap would pause/resume, while right and left swipes would change to the 
next and previous chapter of an audio story, respectively” [9] 
 
Interactive multi-model guide  
The multi-sensory interaction aids learning, inclusion, and collaboration, since it 
accommodates the diverse cognitive and perceptual needs of the VI [18]. Rare individuals 
naturally have sensory crossover, whose synesthesia1 [19] permits them, for example, to see 
colors or shapes when hearing sounds or to sense a specific taste with a specific word [20]. 
Many scientists, technologists and inventors, however, make a conscious attempt to convert one 
type of sensory-like input to a different sensory output [18].  
 
Interactive multi-model guide 
An Interactive multi-model guide developed by Cavazos et al, using 3D technology, 
transformed a flat painting into a 2.5D, combining it with touch, audio description and sound.  
The various visual elements in the work such as ambient sounds that reflect periodic, seasonal, 
temporal and regional information about that work provided a high level experience to the users. 
An important difference except for the multi-sensory experience it provides, is that the BVI 
persons can use it freely without the help of a professional curator which, as we mentioned 
previously, is really important for the BVI persons. Also, the gamification factor added in this 
project maximizes the fun part of the process and stimulates the other senses. Each artwork in 
this project was reproduced with materials that can perceive the haptic touch; so with the fist 
tap of the user on a specific area of the artwork, the user hears an audio description of that part 
and immediately gets the information about the names, color or shapes of the objects, the 
location ; with a second tap they are able to hear a sound effect about that part (such as sounds 
related to the landscape depicted, nature’s sounds such as sounds of leaves, which may refer to 
the autumn, etc.) . The use of natural sounds stimulates the emotions, while the musical 
background which creates emotions similar to those expressed in the artwork immerses them in 
the content of the painting. Also, with the placement of two-dimensional speakers the individual 
is mentally integrated in the physical context of the artwork and is able to understand his 
position in relation to the artwork’s environment. Finally, with the touch of a physical button, 
they are able to hear a recorded track containing use instructions and general information about 
the artwork, such as the painter’s historical and social context, which is an essential part of 
understanding any work. [8] 
BlindTouch artworks exhibited for three weeks at St. Mary’s School (special school for 
the visually impaired, located in Cheongju, Korea). The participants in the Blindtouch 
exhibition interacted-among other artworks-at Vincent van Gogh’s 1889 painting, “The Starry 
Night” Once the users touch the BlindTouch painting two times, a sound which imitates the 
starlight and the sound of a tall cypress swaying in the wind is produced. The sound of the wind 
was played through two speakers to express the swirling movement of the wind, and the 
moonlight and starlight in the sky at the top of the work were expressed as a twinkling ringtone. 
The sounds of shaking leaves and grass bugs on a summer night were also added. To those 
 
1 Synesthesia is a perceptual phenomenon in which stimulation of one sensory modality evokes additional (usually) sensory 
experiences in an unrelated modality (e.g., sounds evoking colors).  [19] 
 
273
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
sounds, background music was added with an atmosphere similar to the emotions inspired by 
“The Starry Night”. To express the warmth coming from the village, an oboe played a major 
scale, and a slightly fast, lyrical melody in the high pitch range of the piano provided a cold 
feeling of dawn. The completed exhibition environment used six-channel speakers arranged on 
flat plates, and the wind sounds were swirled between two speakers to arouse a sense of space 
and enhance appreciation of the artwork through a sense of three-dimensional sound (Figure 6). 
[8] 
Some participants who interacted with Van Gogh’s “Starry Night” referred the below: 
“I’m so happy that I can now tell my friends that I understand Starry Night better through 
the blind touch. Thank you for making art more enjoyable. Especially when I’m older, it’s so 
interesting because I can remember it in a different way.” 
“It feels like the wind is fighting with each other”; “The sound is played from side to 
side to express the feeling of wind blowing”; “There is a lot of wind and it feels cool and cold 
in the air.” [8] 
 
Figure 6. A blind student viewing the “Starry Night” by Vincent van Gogh reproduced in 
2.5D at the BlindTouch exhibition exhibition (Cheongju St. Mary’s School) 
 
(c) 
Haptic Devices for the Exploration of Virtual Copies  
In most of the cases the artifacts in museums or galleries are seldom available for manual 
manipulation; haptic interfaces provide a potential solution to the problem of making three-
dimension work of arts available for manual processing [21]. In their essence haptic interfaces 
provide kinesthetic force feedback to the users in order to perceive information such as shape, 
weight, texture and material properties while manually exploring three-dimension virtual 
objects or computer-generated environments. These devices were firstly used for the 
exploration of complex graphical environments, but because of their kinesthetic sense were 
considered as a suitable auxiliary tool for blind and people with poor vision. Haptic devices 
allow visitors to explore tactile visual replicas and also offer the ability to solve the issue of 
some museums face regarding the storage of duplicate exhibits (physical replicas and original 
exhibits). [1] 
274
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
The European Union Project Museum of Pure Form had as an aim to develop a haptic 
display by converting sculptures from different historical periods and from the collections from 
different museums into virtual replicas. This effort was presented to the public in temporary 
exhibitions and gave the visitors the ability to experience the assets of the digitized artifacts. 
For that reason the visitors were provided with an arm exoskeleton, for force feedback on the 
upper limb and a haptic interface for fingers, in order to exert a force of direction on the 
fingertips, integrated in the lower part of the arm (Figure 7a). [1] 
Experiments after the use of this practice have shown that the users had a pleasing 
experience, although many of them commented that the time to adapt the haptic system and set 
up the device needs to be decreased. They also claimed that the haptic display would be more 
useful if verbal information were added when the users touch specific parts of the artifact. [1] 
The National Museum of Transylvanian History of Cluj-Napoca also digitized three-
dimensional objects, which were experienced through the Geomagic Touch System. Geomagic 
Touch System is a more recent haptic device installation, is a simpler and cost effective system 
proposed by Comes (2016). Users in order to interact with the virtual object pick up a pen 
associated the device, which applies force feedback on their hand. In that practice no hardware 
device is mounted on the users body, on the contrary with the previous case we presented. In 
order to optimize the experience, multiple texture layers where integrated when necessary, so 
that the user can feel with enough accuracy the details of the virtual surfaces he or she is 
touching. [1] 
Probos Sensory Console, is a project which is developed in the context of the European 
Union project AMBAVis and also uses that fore-mentioned type of technology. That project 
aims to enable access to museums and galleries around the world and collaborates with the 
Manchester Museum, UK, and Gallery Belvedere, in Vienna, Austria. In that project too we 
have the use of a stylus, which the visitors hold between their fingers. In Probos Sensory 
Console we have the addition of the hearing sounds while making contact with the object and 
vocal instructions, which were not applied in the previous projects we have mentioned (Figure 
7b). [1] 
Experimental results on blind persons showed that they found it difficult to navigate in 
order to find the virtual objects and perceive the sense of distance or the perspective of the 
virtual space. [1] 
 
 
Figure 7: From Left to Right: a) A Visitor Using the Pure Form Exoskeleton System to 
Interact with Virtual Statues;b) A User Exploring a Digitalized Object [Vaz, Freitas, Coelho, 
2020] 
 
275
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
Feedback from blind and visually impaired persons regarding the 
practices  
When it comes to art collection access, BVI visitors expect physical, intellectual, and 
sensory access to exhibits. This can be provided by multisensory experiences enhanced with 
appropriate contextual information, using a means of communication that allows the 
conceptualization of accurate mental images. In order to have choices that are more independent 
and feel confidence inside museum spaces, facilities for the orientation and mobility are also 
required [1]. 
After the overview of the fore-mentioned ICT practices let’s see how BVI persons 
responded to some of them. When it is possible to have a hands-on approaches to art 
exhibitions,-as the visitors claimed- those experiences are limited to curators’ and other 
museum staff’s selections, and tend to represent only a very small fraction of the main 
collection, when compared with all the information available to sighted visitors [1]. In fact, 
there is a consensus about the importance of touch for somebody with a visual impairment, as 
it is the essence of their access, understanding and construction of mental images of museum 
artifacts. When an object is touched, different maps of the central nervous system are activated 
regarding the movements through which the object is examined, the physical properties that 
activate the tactile sensors, and the humoral and visceral reactions that form the emotional 
response to the object. This exploration results in neural patterns that allow individuals to be 
aware of objects [1]. 
Those dimensions are emphasized by several participants in Argyropoulos and Kanari’s 
research. 
“Touching exhibits in a museum is magic, is a mystery. I will never forget this 
experience. When they describe me the exhibit it’s quite possible to forget it; on the other hand 
if I touch it then this experience stays on my mind, since I had the chance to touch, I could 
develop my own critical thinking, expand my own horizon, and “when you touch the exhibits 
you create first the outline of the object in your mind and then you add some attributes regarding 
texture, temperature and stuff.” [10].  
That specific last sentence emphasizes on the importance of touching the artifacts not 
only for the VI but also for the common visitor. That multisensory experience can lead to a 
better understanding of the materials, shape, texture and even odor. This exploration results in 
neural patterns and emotional connections that allows individuals to connect with objects and 
places of the past, as this is the main reason of the existence of the museums [1]. 
Even though the general positive feedback on that practice some of the visitors said that 
some information are still lacking when haptic experiences are provided. At this point, Hayhoe 
in his book Blind Visitor Experiences at Art Museums (2017) emphasizes that BVI visitors are 
not able to sense the museum object only by touching them. Additional information is of high 
importance in order to understand the whole exhibit context (the same implies for the typical 
visitors as well). Braille descriptions, bas-relief images along with audio description are 
additions that really make a difference [1]. However, a problem that may arise from audio 
descriptions is that the descriptions might be written in ¨visual language¨, which people with 
vision problems cannot fully understand. As a visitor during Hayhoe’s research (2017) at the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York referred:  
“I don’t have a visual image [of the painting being described]…You see that’s the 
problem with the culture [of description]. It depends on who is describing it to you” [1] 
276
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
Also, participants in Neve’s (2012) and Candlin’s (2003) research pointed out that since 
BVI visitors get in touch with the artifacts probably for the first time, they need to have specific 
guidance on what they touch and how to touch it. [1] 
Also, in Reich et al (2011) BVI patrons claim that technology can make their museum 
experiences more positive and inclusive even without the support of the museum staff. [1] 
 
Conclusion 
The incorporation of digital technologies in education domain as well as in inclusion 
domain for supporting people with disabilities is very productive and successful, facilitates and 
improves the educational procedures and accessibility via Mobiles [26-35], various ICTs 
applications [36-68], AI & STEM [69-80], and games [81-86]. Additionally the combination of 
ICTs with theories and models of metacognition, mindfulness, meditation and emotional 
intelligence cultivation [87-110] as well as with environmental factors and nutrition [22-25], 
accelerates and improves more over the educational and supportive practices and results. 
Moreover it is a fact that Internet Access by Visual Impaired or Blind People is a further 
part of life. However, seems to be in an extent degree excluded from social and art life. People 
with disabilities rarely visit museums due to mobility issues in reaching and navigating museum 
buildings and difficulties in accessing artworks [4]. This is because the museums remain mostly 
ocular centric oriented, which does not contribute to the engagement with exhibitions through 
other senses than vision, deprives their access to information and exhibits, and also hinders their 
independent mobility in the museum space [5]. So, for people with ID, the promise of the ICTs 
requires a long way for full social, entertaining and spiritual inclusion. Assistive technology 
(AT) can play a major role in overcoming the barriers that persons with visual impairments 
have to face as it is gaining increasing importance in the process of accessibility at the museums 
for the people. In addition, the usefulness of ICTs was proven through programs and software 
by visually impaired people. This research suggested that the ICT programs and software can 
facilitate the accessibility at the museums and the sight of the exhibits by visual impaired or 
blind individuals and the suggestion was to be further research in order to find out how the 
accessibility can be enhanced. Example is “MusA”, an inclusive mobile app which aims to 
assist people with low vision to have access to the museums and their artworks. 
As far as Individuals with visual impairments are concerned, the “Oregon Project” is an 
interactive audio-visual experience that used proxemic audio to interpret two-dimensional 
images. Also, another program is Using of Color-Concept Directed Scent 
for Visually Impaired Individuals to Appreciate Paintings (2020) assumed that each 
scent has its own relation with color and concept, which the researchers called color directivity 
and concept directivity, respectively. Another important technology tool Blind Museum Tourer 
which was designed for the Tactual Museum of the Lighthouse for the Blind of Greece, the 
National Archaeological Museum and the Acropolis Museum and it was used for physical 
access and indoor navigation. 
Finally, the use of computers and assistive devices strengthens the self-independence 
and socialization of visual impaired people. It is obvious that researches have shown that 
governments should organize ICTs at museums and art in order to bridge the gaping accessing 
ICT among different individuals and social groups. 
 
277
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
[1] 
Vaz, R., Freitas, D. & Coelho, A. (2020, June 26). Blind and Visually Impaired 
Visitors’ 
Experiences 
in 
Museums: 
Increasing 
Accessibility 
through 
Assistive 
Technologies. The International Journal of the Inclusive Museum. 13, (2), 57-80.  
[2] 
Asakawa, S., Ahmetovic, D., Guerreiro, J. & Kitani, K. (2018). The Present and Future 
of Museum Accessibility for People with Visual Impairments. ASSETS '18: Proceedings of the 
20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. 382–384.  
[3] 
Kefalidou, A. (2021). The importance of digital art technology for supporting people 
with vision impairments. Practices for a museum aiming at social inclusion. The case of 
“Mind’s Eye | Opening Arts to the visually impaired 2019/20” at MOMus - Museum of 
Contemporary Art in Thessaloniki. Μη εκδεδομένη διδακτορική διατριβή, Department of 
Humanities, Social Sciences and Economics International Hellenic University, Thessaloniki.  
[4] 
Ahmetovic, D., Bernareggi, C., Keller, K., Mascetti, S. (2021). MusA: Artwork 
Accessibility through Augmented Reality for People with Low Vision. W4A’21: Proceedings 
of the 18th International Web for All Conference, 1-9. 
[5] 
Vaz, R., Freitas, D., Coelho, A. (2021). Perspectives of Visually Impaired Visitors on 
Museums: Towards an Integrative and Multisensory Framework to Enhance the Museum 
Experience. DSAI 2020: 9th International Conference on Software Development and 
Technologies for Enhancing Accessibility and Fighting Info-exclusion, 17-21. 
[6] 
Montusiewicz, J., Miłosz, M., Kęsik, J. (2018). Technical Aspects of Museum 
Exposition for Visually Impaired Preparation Using Modern 3D Technologies. IEEE Global 
Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), 774-779. 
[7] 
Anastasiou, D. & Kauffman, J. (2014, July 1). Η Δυσικανότητα ως Πολιτισμική 
Διαφορά, Συνεπειες για την Ειδική Αγωγή. Εκαπιδευτική Λέσχη, 1-20. 
[8] 
Cho, J. (2021, February 15). A Study of Multi-Sensory Experience and Color 
Recognition in Visual Arts Appreciation of People with Visual Impairment. Electronics. 10, 
(470), 1-37. 
[9] 
Asakawa, S., Guerreiro, J., Sato, D., Takagi, H., Ahmetovic, D., Gonzalez, D., Kitani, 
K. & Asakawa, C. (2019). An Independent and Interactive Museum Experience for Blind 
People. W4A '19: Web For All 2019 Personalization - Personalizing the Web. 1-9.   
[10] 
 Argyropoulos, V. & Charikleia, K. (2015, 12 Φεβρουαρίου). Re-imagining the 
museum through “touch”:Reflections of individuals with visual disabilityon their experience of 
museum-visitingin Greece. ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research 9, 130-143. 
[11] 
Al Zidjaly, N. (2011). Managing Social Exclusion through Technology: An Example 
of Art as Mediated Action. Disability Studies Quarterly. 31, (4).  
[12] 
Lesturgie, G. (2000). L'art du handicap. Mouvement. 
[13] 
S. Sulewski, J., Boeltzig, H. & Hasnain, R. (2012). Art and Disability: Intersecting 
Identities among Young Artists with Disabilities. Disability Studies Quarterly. 32, (1).  
[14] 
Hale, J. (2 Ιουνίου, 2020). Talent, tech and visual art. Wellcomecollection.org.  
[15] 
Ho, V. (18 Νοεμβρίου, 2016). Interpreting visual art with sound for a more inclusive 
experience. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/keith-salmon-oregon-project/.  
[16] 
Sheehy, K., Garcia-Carrizosa, H., Rix, J., Seale, J., Hayhoe, S. (2019). Inclusive 
Museums and Augmented Reality: Affordances, Participation, Ethics, and Fun. The 
International Journal of the Inclusive Museum 12(4). 
[17] 
Meliones A, Sampson D. (2018). Blind MuseumTourer: A System for Self-Guided 
Tours in Museums and Blind Indoor Navigation. Technologies. 6 (1).  
278
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
[18] 
 Cavazos Quero, L. (2018). An Interactive Multimodal Guide to Improve Art 
Accessibility for [17] Blind People. Assets '18: The 20th International ACM SIGACCESS 
Conference on Computersans Accessibility, Galway, Ireland, October 22-24 2018. New York, 
346-348. 
[19] 
Brang, D. & Ramachandran, V. (2020). Multisensory Perception, From Laboratory to 
Clinic. United States: K. Sathian, V.S. Ramachandran,  
[20] 
Suslick, K. (2012, December). Synesthesia in science and technology: more than 
making the unseen visible. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology. 16, (2), 5-6. 
[21] 
Jansson, G., Massimo, B. & Antonio, F. (2003, May 29). A new option for the visually 
impaired to experience 3D art at museums: manual exploration of virtual copies. Visual 
Impairment Research 1388. 5, (1), 1-12.  
[22] 
Stavridou Th., Driga, A.M., Drigas, A.S., Blood Markers in Detection of Autism 
,International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering Science & IT (iJES) 9(2):79-
86. 2021. 
[23] 
Zavitsanou, A., & Drigas, A. (2021). Nutrition in mental and physical health. 
Technium Soc. Sci. J., 23, 67.  
[24] 
Driga, A.M., Drigas, A.S. “Climate Change 101: How Everyday Activities Contribute 
to the Ever-Growing Issue”, International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering, 
Science & IT, vol. 7(1), pp. 22-31, 2019. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v7i1.10031 
[25] 
Driga, A.M., and Drigas, A.S. “ADHD in the Early Years: Pre-Natal and Early Causes 
and Alternative Ways of Dealing.” International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering 
(IJOE), vol. 15, no. 13, 2019, p. 95., doi:10.3991/ijoe.v15i13.11203 
[26] 
Vlachou J.  and Drigas, A. S., “Mobile technology for students and adults with Autistic 
Spectrum Disorders (ASD),” International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, vol. 
11(1), pp. 4-17, 2017 
[27] 
Papoutsi C., Drigas, A. S., and C. Skianis, “Mobile Applications to Improve Emotional 
Intelligence in Autism – A Review,” Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. (iJIM); Vol 12, No 6, 2018 
[28] 
Karabatzaki, Z., Stathopoulou, A., Kokkalia, G., Dimitriou, E., Loukeri, P., Economou 
A., & Drigas, A. (2018). Mobile Application Tools for Students in Secondary Education. An 
Evaluation Study. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), 12(2), 142-
161 
[29] 
Drigas, A. S.,  and Angelidakis P., 'Mobile Applications within Education: An 
Overview of Application Paradigms in Specific Categories', International Journal of Interactive 
Mobile Technologies (iJIM), vol. 11, no. 4, p. 17, May 2017. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v11i4. 
6589 
[30] 
Stathopoulou A., Loukeris D., Karabatzaki Z., Politi E., Salapata Y., and Drigas, A. 
S.,  “Evaluation of Mobile Apps Effectiveness in Children with Autism Social Training via 
Digital Social Stories,” Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. (iJIM); Vol 14, No 03, 2020 
[31] 
Stathopoulou, et all Mobile assessment procedures for mental health and literacy skills 
in education. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, 12(3), 21-37, 2018, 
[32] 
Drigas, A., Kokkalia, G. & Lytras, M. D. (2015). Mobile and Multimedia Learning in 
Preschool Education. J. Mobile Multimedia, 11(1/2), 119–133. 
[33] 
Stathopoulou, A., Karabatzaki, Z., Kokkalia, G., Dimitriou, E., Loukeri, P.I., 
Economou, A., and Drigas, A. (2018). Mobile assessment procedures for mental health and 
literacy skills in education. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), 
12(3):21-37. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v12i3.8038 
279
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
[34] 
Drigas, A.S., Ioannidou, R.E., Kokkalia, G. and Lytras, M. (2014), “ICTs, mobile 
learning and social media to enhance learning for attention difficulties”, Journal of Universal 
Computer Science, Vol. 20 No. 10, pp. 1499-1510. 
[35] 
Kokkalia G. K.  and Drigas, A. S.,  “Mobile learning for special preschool education,” 
International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, vol. 10 (1), pp. 60-67, 2016 
[36] 
Pappas, M.A.; Papoutsi, C.; Drigas, A.S. Policies, Practices, and Attitudes toward 
Inclusive Education: The Case of Greece. Soc. Sci. 2018, 7, 90. 
[37] 
Drigas, A. S., & Ioannidou, R. E. (2011, September). ICTs in special education: A 
review. In World Summit on Knowledge Society (pp. 357-364). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
[38] 
Drigas, A. S., J.Vrettaros, L.Stavrou, D.Kouremenos, E-learning Environment for 
Deaf people in the E-Commerce and New Technologies Sector, WSEAS Transactions on 
Information Science and Applications, Issue 5, Volume 1, November 2004. 
[39] 
Drigas, A.S., Vrettaros, J. and Kouremenos, D. (2004a) ‘Teleeducation and e-learning 
services for teaching English as a second language to deaf people, whose first language is the 
sign language’, WSEAS Transactions on Information Science and Applications, Vol. 1, No. 3, 
pp.834–842. 
[40] 
Drigas, A., Koukianakis, L., Papagerasimou, Y., Towards an ICT-based psychology: 
Epsychology, 
Computers 
in 
Human 
Behavior, 
2011, 
27:1416–1423. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.045 
[41] 
Charami, F., & Drigas, A. (2014). ICTs in English Learning and Teaching. 
International Journal of Engineering and Science. Vol. 2(4):4-10. DOI: 10.3991/ijes.v2i4.4016 
[42] 
Drigas A.S., Kouremenos D (2005) An e-learning system for the deaf people. In: 
WSEAS transaction on advances in engineering education, vol 2, issue 1, pp 20–24 
[43] 
Drigas A., Pappas M, and Lytras M., “Emerging technologies for ict based education 
for dyscalculia: Implications for computer engineering education,” International Journal of 
Engineering Education, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1604–1610, 2016. 
[44] 
Drigas, A. & Kokkalia, G. 2017. ICTs and Special Education in Kindergarten. 
International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning 9 (4), 35–42. 
[45] 
Drigas A.,  and Koukianakis L., A Modular Environment for E-learning and E-
psychology Applications, WSEAS Transactions on Information Science and Application, Vol. 
3, 2004, pp. 2062-2067. 
[46] 
Drigas, A., Leliopoulos, P.: Business to consumer (B2C) e-commerce decade 
evolution. Int. J. Knowl. Soc. Res. (IJKSR) 4(4), 1–10 (2013) 
[47] 
Pappas M, Drigas A, Papagerasimou Y, Dimitriou H, Katsanou N, Papakonstantinou 
S, et al. Female Entrepreneurship and Employability in the Digital Era: The Case of Greece. 
Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity. 2018; 4(2): 1. 
[48] 
Papanastasiou G., Drigas, A. S.,  Skianis Ch., M. Lytras & E. Papanastasiou, “Patient-
Centric ICTs based Healthcare for students with learning, physical and/or sensory disabilities,” 
Telemat Inform, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 654–664, 2018. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.tele.2017.09.002 
[49] 
Drigas, A., & Kontopoulou, M. T. L. (2016). ICTs based Physics Learning. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Engineering 
Pedagogy 
(iJEP), 
6(3), 
53-59. 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijep.v6i3. 5899 
[50] 
Papanastasiou, G., Drigas, A., Skianis, C., and Lytras, M. (2020). Brain computer 
interface based applications for training and rehabilitation of students with neurodevelopmental 
disorders. A literature review. Heliyon 6:e04250. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04250 
[51] 
Drigas, A. S., John Vrettaros, and Dimitris Kouremenos, 2005. “An e-learning 
management system for the deaf people,” AIKED ’05: Proceedings of the Fourth WSEAS 
280
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering Data Bases, article 
number 28. 
[52] 
Pappas, M., Demertzi, E., Papagerasimou, Y., Koukianakis, L., Kouremenos, D., 
Loukidis, I. and Drigas, A. 2018. E-Learning for deaf adults from a user-centered perspective. 
Education Sciences 8(206): 3-15. 
[53] 
 Marios A. Pappas, Eleftheria Demertzi, Yannis Papagerasimou, Lefteris Koukianakis, 
Nikitas Voukelatos, and Drigas, A. S.,  2019. Cognitive Based E-Learning Design for Older 
Adults. Social Sciences 8, 1 (Jan. 2019), 6. https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci801000 
[54] 
 Drigas, A. S.,  Leyteris Koukianakis: Government online: An e-government platform 
to improve public administration operations and services delivery to the citizen. WSKS (1), 
volume 5736 de Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 523–532. Springer, 2009.  
[55] 
 Theodorou, P.; Drigas, A. ICTs and Music in Generic Learning Disabilities. Int. J. 
Emerg. Technol. Learn. 2017, 12, 101–110 
[56] 
 Drigas, A., Kokkalia, G., & Lytras, M. D. (2015). ICT and collaborative co-learning 
in preschool children who face memory difficulties. Computers in Human Behavior, 51, 645–
651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.01.019 
[57] 
Pappas, M.A., & Drigas, A.S. (2015). ICT based screening tools and etiology of 
dyscalculia. International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy, 3, 61-66. 
[58] 
Drigas, A., & Kostas, I. (2014). On Line and other ICTs Applications for teaching 
math in Special Education. International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering, 
Science & IT (iJES), 2(4), pp-46. http://dx.doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v2i4.4204 
[59] 
Alexopoulou, A, Batsou, A, Drigas, A. (2019). Resilience and academic 
underachievement in gifted students: causes, consequences and strategic methods of prevention 
and intervention. International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE), vol. 15, 
no. 14, pp. 78. 
[60] 
Pappas, M. A., & Drigas, A. S. (2015). ICT Based Screening Tools and Etiology of 
Dyscalculia. International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy, 5(3) 
[61] 
Drigas, A. & Ioannidou, R. E. (2013). Special education and ICT's. International 
Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning 8(2), 41– 47. 
[62] 
Drigas, A., & Papanastasiou, G. (2014). Interactive White Boards in Preschool and 
Primary Education. International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE), 10(4), 
46–51. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v10i4.3754 
[63] 
Drigas, A. S. and Politi-Georgousi, S. (2019). Icts as a distinct detection approach for 
dyslexia screening: A contemporary view. International Journal of Online and Biomedical 
Engineering (iJOE), 15(13):46–60. 
[64] 
Lizeta N. Bakola, Nikolaos D. Rizos, Drigas, A. S.,  “ICTs for Emotional and Social 
Skills Development for Children with ADHD and ASD Co-existence”International Journal of 
Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v14i05.9430 
[65] 
Kontostavlou, E.Z., & Drigas, A.S. (2019). The Use of Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) in Gifted Students. International Journal of Recent 
Contributions from Engineering, Science and IT, 7(2), 60-67. doi:10.3991/ijes.v7i2.10815 
[66] 
Drigas, A. S., and Vlachou J. A., “Information and communication technologies (ICTs) 
and autistic spectrum disorders (ASD),” Int. J. Recent Contrib. Eng. Sci. IT (iJES), vol. 4, no. 
1, p. 4, 2016. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v4i1.5352 
[67] 
Drigas, A. S., Koukianakis, L, Papagerasimou, Y. (2006) “An elearning environment 
for nontraditional students with sight disabilities.”, Frontiers in Education Conference, 36th 
Annual. IEEE, p. 23-27. 
281
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
[68] 
Drigas A., and Koukianakis L. An open distance learning e-system to support SMEs 
e-enterprising. In proceeding of 5th WSEAS Internationalconference on Artificial intelligence, 
knowledge engineering, data bases (AIKED 2006). Spain 
[69] 
Kefalis C and Drigas A. (2019) Web Based and Online Applications in STEM 
Education. International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy (iJEP) 9, 4 (2019), 76– 
85.https://doi.org/10.3991/ijep.v9i4.10691 
[70] 
 Drigas, A. S.,  Rodi-Eleni Ioannidou, A Review on Artificial Intelligence in Special 
Education, Information Systems, Elearning, and Knowledge Management Research 
Communications in Computer and Information Science Volume 278, pp 385-391, 2013 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35879-1_46 
[71] 
 Drigas, A., Vrettaros, J.: An Intelligent Tool for Building e-Learning Contend-
Material Using Natural Language in Digital Libraries. WSEAS Transactions on Information 
Science and Applications 5(1) (2004) 1197–1205 
[72] 
Drigas, A.S., Vrettaros, J., Koukianakis, L.G. and Glentzes, J.G. (2005). A Virtual Lab 
and e-learning system for renewable energy sources. Int. Conf. on Educational Tech. 
[73] 
 Drigas AS, Argyri K, Vrettaros J (2009) Decade review (1999-2009): artificial 
intelligence techniques in student modeling. In: World Summit on Knowledge Society. 
Springer, pp 552–564 
[74] 
Vrettaros, J., Tagoulis, A., Giannopoulou, N., & Drigas, A. (2009). An empirical study 
on the use of Web 2.0 by Greek adult instructors in educational procedures. World Summit on 
Knowledge System (WSKS), 49, 164-170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-04757-2_18 
[75] 
Drigas, A., Dourou, A. (2013). A Review on ICTs, E-Learning and Artificial 
Intelligence for Dyslexic's Assistance. iJet, 8(4), 63-67. 
[76] 
Drigas, A. S., Ioannidou,E.R., (2012), Artificial intelligence in special education: A 
decade review, International Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 28, no. 6. 
[77] 
Drigas, A. S., and Leliopoulos, Panagiotis, The Use of Big Data in Education, 
International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 11, Issue 5, 2014, 58-63 
[78] 
Anagnostopoulou, P., Alexandropoulou, V., Lorentzou, G., Lykothanasi, A., 
Ntaountaki, P., & Drigas, A. (2020). Artificial intelligence in autism assessment. International 
Journal 
of 
Emerging 
Technologies 
in 
Learning, 
15(6), 
95-107. 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v15i06.11231 
[79] 
Pappas, M., & Drigas, A. (2016). Incorporation of artificial intelligence tutoring 
techniques in mathematics. International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy, 6(4), 12–16. 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijep.v6i4.6063 
[80] 
Chaidi E, Kefalis C, Papagerasimou Y, Drigas (2021) A Educational robotics in 
Primary Education. A case in Greece. Research, Society and Development 10 (9)  
[81] 
Papanastasiou, G. P., Drigas, A. S., & Skianis, C. (2017). Serious games in preschool 
and primary education: Benefits and impacts on curriculum course syllabus. International 
Journal 
of 
Emerging 
Technologies 
in 
Learning, 
12(1), 
44–56. 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v12i01.6065 
[82] 
Kokkalia, G., Drigas, A., Economou, A., Roussos, P., & Choli, S. (2017). The use of 
serious games in preschool education. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in 
Learning, 12(11), 15-27. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v12i11.6991 
[83] 
Drigas, A. S., and Pappas M.A. "On line and other Game-Based Learning for 
Mathematics." International Journal of Online Engineering (iJOE) 11.4, 62-67, 2015 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v11i4.4742 
282
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
[84] 
Papanastasiou, G., Drigas, A., Skianis, C., & Lytras, M. D. (2017). Serious games in 
K-12 education: Benefits and impacts on students with attention, memory and developmental 
disabilities. Program, 51(4), 424-440. https://doi.org/10.1108/prog-02-2016-0020 
[85] 
Drigas, A. S., & Kokkalia, G. K. (2014). ICTs in Kindergarten. International Journal 
of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 9(2). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v9i2.3278 
[86] 
Kokkalia, G., Drigas, A., & Economou, A. (2016). The role of games in special 
preschool education. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 
11(12), 30-35. 
[87] 
Drigas, A., & Mitsea, E. (2020). The 8 Pillars of Metacognition. International Journal 
of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 15(21), 162-178. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet. 
v15i21.14907 
[88] 
Drigas, A., & Papoutsi, C. (2019). Emotional intelligence as an important asset for HR 
in organizations: Leaders and employees. International Journal of Advanced Corporate 
Learning, 12(1). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijac.v12i1.9637 
[89] 
Drigas, A. S.,  and M. Pappas, “The Consciousness-Intelligence-Knowledge Pyramid: 
An 8x8 Layer Model,” International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering, Science 
& IT (iJES), vol. 5, no.3, pp 14-25, 2017. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v5i3.7680 
[90] 
Mitsea, E., & Drigas, A. (2019). A journey into the metacognitive learning strategies. 
International Journal of Online & Biomedical Engineering, 15(14). https://doi.org/ 
10.3991/ijoe.v15i14.11379 
[91] 
Drigas A, Karyotaki M (2017) Attentional control and other executive functions. Int J 
Emerg Technol Learn iJET 12(03):219–233 
[92] 
Drigas A, Karyotaki M 2014. Learning Tools and Application for Cognitive 
Improvement. International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy, 4(3): 71-77. From (Retrieved on 
13 May 2016) 
[93] 
Drigas, A., & Mitsea, E. (2021). 8 Pillars X 8 Layers Model of Metacognition: 
Educational Strategies, Exercises &Trainings. International Journal of Online & Biomedical 
Engineering, 17(8). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v17i08.23563 
[94] 
Drigas A., Papoutsi C. (2020). The Need for Emotional Intelligence Training 
Education in Critical and Stressful Situations: The Case of COVID-19. Int. J. Recent Contrib. 
Eng. Sci. IT 8 (3), 20–35. 10.3991/ijes.v8i3.17235 
[95] 
Drigas, A., & Mitsea, E. (2020). The Triangle of Spiritual Intelligence, Metacognition 
and Consciousness. International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering, Science & 
IT (iJES), 8(1), 4-23. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v8i1.12503 
[96] 
Kokkalia, G., Drigas, A. Economou, A., & Roussos, P. (2019). School readiness from 
kindergarten to primary school. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 
14(11), 4-18. 
[97] 
Drigas, A., & Mitsea, E. (2021). Metacognition, stress-relaxation balance & related 
hormones. International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering, Science & IT 
(iJES), 9(1), 4–16. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v9i1.19623 
[98] 
Pappas M, Drigas A. Computerized Training for Neuroplasticity and Cognitive 
Improvement. International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy. 2019;.(4):50-62 
[99] 
Papoutsi, C. and Drigas, A. (2017) Empathy and Mobile Applications. International 
Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies 11. 57. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v11i3.6385 
[100] 
Papoutsi, C. & Drigas, A. (2016). Games for Empathy for Social Impact. International 
Journal of Engineering Pedagogy 6(4), 36-40. 
283
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
[101] 
Karyotaki, M., & Drigas, A.  (2015). Online and other  ICT  Applications  for  
Cognitive Training  and  Assessment. International Journal of Online and Biomedical 
Engineering. 11(2), 36-42. 
[102] 
Papoutsi, C., Drigas, A., & Skianis, C. (2019). Emotional intelligence as an important 
asset for HR in organizations: Attitudes and working variables. International Journal of 
Advanced Corporate Learning, 12(2), 21–35. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijac.v12i2.9620 
[103] 
Chaidi I.  and Drigas, A. S., “Autism, Expression, and Understanding of Emotions: 
Literature Review,” Int. J. Online Biomed. Eng., vol. 16, no. 02, pp. 94–111, 2020. 
https://doi.org/ 10.3991/ijoe.v16i02.11991 
[104] 
Chaidi I., Drigas, A.  C Karagiannidis Autistic people's family and emotional 
intelligence Technium Soc. Sci. J. 26, 194 
[105] 
Drigas, A. S., & Karyotaki, M. (2019). A Layered Model of Human Consciousness. 
International Journal of Recent Contributions from Engineering, Science & IT (iJES), 7(3), 41- 
50. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v7i3.11117 
[106] 
Drigas, A. S., Karyotaki, M., & Skianis, C. (2018). An Integrated Approach to Neuro-
development, Neuroplasticity and Cognitive Improvement. International Journal of Recent 
Contributions from Engineering, Science & IT (iJES), 6(3), 4-18. 
[107] 
Karyotaki M.  and Drigas, A. S., “Latest trends in problem solving assessment,” 
International Journal of Recent contributions from Engineering, Science & IT (iJES), vol. 4, no. 
2, 
2016. 
[Online 
serial]. 
Available: 
https://online-journals.org/index.php/i-
jes/article/view/5800/. [Accessed Aug. 21, 2019]. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijes.v4i2.5800 
[108] 
Mitsea E., Drigas, A. S.,  andMantas P., “Soft Skills & Metacognition as Inclusion 
Amplifiers in the 21st Century,” Int. J. Online Biomed. Eng. IJOE, vol. 17, no. 04, Art. no. 04, 
Apr. 2021. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v17i04.20567 
[109] 
Angelopoulou, E.  Drigas, A. (2021). Working Memory, Attention and their 
Relationship: A theoretical Overview. Research. Society and Development,10(5), 1-
8. https://doi.org/10.33448/rsd-v10i5.15288 
[110] 
Tourimpampa, A., Drigas, A., Economou, A., & Roussos, P. (2018). Perception and 
text comprehension. It’sa matter of perception! International Journal of Emerging Technologies 
in 
Learning 
(iJET). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://online-
journals.org/index.php/ijet/article/view/7909/5051 
 
284
Technium Social Sciences Journal
Vol. 35, 263-284, September, 2022
ISSN: 2668-7798
www.techniumscience.com

