MUSEUMS AND PEOPLE WITH VISUAL DISABILITY: AN 
EXPLORATION AND IMPLEMENTATION THROUGH AN ERASMUS+ 
PROJECT  
Vassilios Argyropoulos, Magda Nikolaraizi, Sofia Chamonikolaou, Charikleia 
Kanari  
University of Thessaly (GREECE) 
Abstract 
The access of people with disabilities to museums has become a major issue of interest for museums. 
Individuals with visual disabilities, which is one of the target groups of the present project, face many 
barriers regarding their access to museums, since museums are considered as spaces “of seeing” 
and “do not touch”. The present project titled “Bridging the Gap between Museums and Individuals 
with Visual Impairments” aims to support museums to develop various practices in order to enhance 
the access and inclusion of people with visual disability into their context and content. Museums, as 
audience-centered spaces, are required to enhance the access and inclusion of individuals with visual 
disability. However, this is a challenging task for museums and requires the collaboration between 
museums and organizations involved in the education and the protection of individuals with visual 
disabilities. This need for collaboration and interagency partnerships is the basis of the project, which 
aims to bridge the gap between museums and individuals with visual disabilities. 
Keywords: Students with visual disability, Individuals with visual disabilities, Museums, Action 
Research, Erasmus+ Programme. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The formulation and the adoption of social model of disability significantly affects the policies and 
practices towards disability. The social model of disability indicated issues such as the failure of the 
society to respond to the needs of people with disabilities, the barriers and the limitations of the 
society which have the effect of excluding people with disabilities from equal social participation. Such 
an example is the interaction between museums and people with disability ([1], [2], [3], [4]). 
The aforementioned is in line with the development of the role of museums as cultural institutions. 
Nowadays museums are not considered only as spaces of collection, preservation and display of 
objects but institutions with a wide educational and social role ([5], [6], [7], [8]). In the recent past 
museums have redefined their relationship with their audiences [9] and this relationship is depicted on 
the museums’ definition of the International Council of Museums [10]. The recognition of the 
heterogeneous audience in combination with the finding that museums for centuries were addressing 
limited social groups [11], have led museums to redefine their relationship with their audiences and 
their social and educational role in order to contact different people and respond to contemporary 
social changes. This means that museums are not considered any more just as spaces, which collect, 
preserve and exhibit objects but as audience-centred spaces with a wide educational and social role 
([5], [7], [8]). In this framework, the access of people with disabilities to museums has become a major 
issue of interest for museums. It is argued that the right of all people for access to cultural goods has 
found in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 [12]. Also, access to culture has been 
recognized as a right of people with disabilities in the Convention of the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities [13]. 
Regarding access of people with disabilities to museums, it is true that access for people of disabilities 
is a central topic of discussion in museums around the world. Because access to museums is a 
“multidimensional reality” [14] namely there are different types of access like physical access, sensory, 
intellectual, emotional/attitudinal, financial, cultural, digital access etc. ([14], [15]). Nowadays many 
steps have been made toward a wider accessibility of people with disabilities to museums such as: 
guidelines for an accessible environment in the framework of Universal Design, the introduction of 
legislation against discrimination in different countries ([16], [17]), initiatives and relevant research of a 
number of associations for people with disabilities for the improvement of their accessibility, etc. 
However, there are a lot of differences among different countries and museums since there are 
Proceedings of EDULEARN16 Conference 
4th-6th July 2016, Barcelona, Spain
ISBN: 978-84-608-8860-4
4509

varying levels of commitment and success for the achievement of access [18]. Furthermore there is 
more attention of enhancing physical access and to a lesser extent to other types of access like 
sensory access ([18], [19]). It seems that despite the intensive discussions about access to cultural 
goods for people with disabilities their cultural rights are poorly implemented [20].  
In order to build bridges between society and museum we should also consider the relationship 
between education and museums. This cultural education and the educational opportunities are not 
provided only by museums but also in schools [21]. A recent research for the current accessibility 
practices in cultural sectors for individuals with visual disability in Europe [20] stresses the importance 
of education supporting, among others, that cultural accessibility and “societal change should start 
with raising awareness of disabled people equity in schools”. This will lead to the configuration of 
positive attitudes of students and encouraging them to participate in different spaces and actions and 
cultivate different skills ([22], [23]). 
People with visual disabilities, which is one of the target groups of the present project, face many 
barriers regarding their access to museums ([14], [24]), since museums are considered as spaces “of 
seeing” and “do not touch” [24]. Many museums around the world have developed various practices in 
order to enhance the access of people with visual disabilities ([15], [25]), such as touch collections or 
audio guides but many disabling barriers still exist.  
Examples of barriers may be the tendency of museums to encounter visitors with visual disabilities as 
a homogeneous group and therefore treat them as a group with a single characteristic; that is their 
lack of sight [26]. The poor content of special programmes that often museums organize for individuals 
with visual disabilities ([27], [28]), and the museum staff’s attitudes and behaviors, who are often not 
trained to make individuals with visual disabilities feel welcome in the museum [29] are also typical 
examples of barriers. As a result visitors with visual disabilities have very limited opportunities to 
broaden their knowledge in the context of a museum.  
Museums are required to address the needs of individuals with visual disabilities, enhance their 
access, and contribute to their educational and social inclusion. This is a challenging task for 
museums and requires the collaboration between museums and organizations involved in the 
education, the development and the protection of individuals with visual disabilities. It is estimated as 
significant the collaboration between museums and schools in the learning and inclusion of students 
with disabilities ([1], [23]). This need for collaboration and interagency partnerships is the basis of the 
present project, which aims to bridge the gap between museums and individuals with visual 
disabilities. Hence, the present project “Bridging the Gap between Museums and Individuals with 
Visual Impairments” (BaGMIVI) - which is presented and delineated in the present paper - aims to 
address and fulfil the following objectives: 
• To enable the museum members become aware and update their knowledge regarding the 
disabling barriers that impede the access of visitors with visual disabilities to museums and the 
techniques that can enhance the access and inclusion of individuals with visual disabilities to 
the museums. 
• To create learning, cultural and social opportunities for individuals with visual disabilities and 
enable them acquire self-advocacy skills regarding their rights as museum visitors and the 
requirements of an inclusive museum. 
• To promote the collaboration between museums, schools and associations of individuals with 
visual disabilities. 
• To point out the best practices and guidelines for the development of an accessible and 
inclusive museum for visitors with visual disabilities. 
2 
METHODOLOGY 
The present European project is implemented under the umbrella of the Erasmus+ Programme and 
aims to bridge the gap between museums and individuals with visual disabilities. The main objectives 
of the present project – as mentioned above - aim to shape and promote strategic partnerships 
between museums and educational settings within which students with visual disability are enrolled. In 
essence, the present project involves primarily academics who are experts in the field of visual 
disability, museum education, museum educational programmes as well as experts who work in 
museums and have experience in touch collections, touch exhibitions, touch tours and tactile 
diagrams. 
4510

2.1 Participants and Partnerships 
All project partners are involved in the field of visual disability with different occupations and duties. In 
specific, twelve formal and four silent partners constitute the consortium of this project.  Four of the 
twelve formal partners are universities (University of Thessaly-UTH, Sofia University-SU, University 
Babes Bolyai-UBB, and Eotvos Lorand University-ELTE), three are non-profit non-governmental 
organisations (i.e the International Council for Education and Rehabilitation of people with Visual 
Impairment-ICEVI-Europe, the Bulgarian Association for Education of Visually Impaired Children- 
BAOZZD, and the European Blind Union-EBU), four are museums (an archeological, two galleries and 
one ethnographic), and one is an IT Company. The contact persons of the Universities are all experts 
in the education and rehabilitation of people who are blind and visually impaired. They are also 
functioning as contact persons on behalf of their country (Greece, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary 
respectively) under the umbrella of ICEVI-Europe who is one of the six regional bodies of the World 
Blind Union, representing, protecting and promoting the interests of blind and partially-sighted people 
in continental Europe, including the EU-27 Member States, the EEA countries and the candidate 
countries associated to the EU. Finally, the silent partners constitute special schools for the blind 
which all have experience in participating in projects. 
2.2 The Roadmap of the project – Work plan and activities 
The ultimate target of the BaGMIVI project is to strengthen and consolidate partnerships between 
museums and educational settings  within which blind students are enrolled by training the staff of the 
former to meet the needs of museum visitors who have visual disabilities enhancing their social 
inclusion through accessible cultural content and differentiated instructional approaches and museum 
programmes.  
In total, organizations such as universities, museums, associations for the blind, NGOs and 
educational settings have collaborated to shape a networking with activities at many levels. It is 
argued that all BaGMIVI activities lie in the strands of action research. Action research is a 
methodology that fulfils two important conditions; one is that it seeks improvement and the other is that 
it seeks an understanding of the setting and context in general ([30], [31]). The aforementioned 
conditions are apparent in BaGMIVI project because the museum programs will be enriched regarding 
the level of collaboration between the museum staff and the individuals with visual disability. Also, 
several principles of action research [32], such as research and investigation, analysis of practice, 
applying theory through action, evaluating practice, reflection, and constant renewal strengthened the 
argument about choosing action research as the best methodology for the purposes and requirements 
of all activities which are incorporated in the BaGMIVI project (see also below). 
The activities which this project has organised – some have been integrated and others are in the 
process - fall in with three action levels: (a) preliminary, (b) vertical, and (c) horizontal.  
2.2.1 Preliminary Activities (PA) 
PA1. The first preliminary phase aims at a thorough literature review to investigate the reasons for the 
exclusion of visitors with visual disability from cultural centres such as museums and galleries. PA1 
can be characterized as situational analysis and has provided insights from both sides (i.e. 
participating museums and participating educational settings). The product of PA1 comprises a 
detailed report with enriched data from all partners of the BaGMIVI project. 
PA2. The results of PA1 were discussed between the partners (skype, meetings) and were used to 
organize Intensive Training Programmes (ITP) enriched with workshops for museum staff exploring a 
range of topics relevant to special education, visual disability, haptic perception, orientation and 
mobility, differentiated content, touch collections, touch exhibitions, touch tours, audio guides, verbal 
descriptions, handling sessions, three-dimensional models, replicas, information in braille, large print, 
tactile diagrams, and issues pertinent to “design for all”. Also the BaGMIVI consortium during the ISPs 
had the opportunity to discuss the barriers that teachers and students with visual disability faced in 
their museum visits.    
2.2.2 Vertical Activities (VA)  
This level of activities refers to the actions taken by every single partner in the BaGMIVI project. For 
example, vertical activities refer to the collaboration between university and museum as well as 
between museum and educational setting. Also, within the set of vertical activities, each partner 
4511

appointed a. the museum or the gallery where the ITP took place, and b. the educational setting where 
students and teachers will set up organized visits to the museum aiming to extract a set of best 
practices from this collaboration. The analysis of the VAs of the BaGMIVI project is as follows: 
VA1. Each contact person is in charge for the completion of an ITP which brought together the 
museum staff and teaching staff from participating higher education institutions relevant to the field of 
visual disability as well as other relevant experts and professionals (academics, specialists from 
relevant organizations, etc.). The objectives of each ITP were: (a) to inform the museum staff  about 
the needs of the individuals with visual disability during their museum visits (data from PA1), (b) to 
enable museum staff to work together with specialists and experts in groups so they could benefit from 
special learning and gain new perspectives relevant to issues such as special education, visual 
disability, touch collections, touch tours, three-dimensional models, replicas, information in Braille, and 
the like, (c) to enable museum staff to plan differentiated museum educational programmes with 
relevant haptic and acoustic content, and (d) to give the opportunity to museum staff to meet teachers 
and students with visual disabilities on a regular basis and discuss through the context of a museum 
educational programme issues of accessibility, aesthetics and emotions. The ultimate purpose of the 
ITP is to enable museum staff to collaborate effectively with educational settings within which students 
with visual disabilities are enrolled and build up bridges of social integration and strategic partnerships 
with permanent character leading to joint study programmes and joint curricula. The product of VA1 is 
a report from each country about the planning and act of the ITP which will take place in museums or 
in galleries.  
VA2. After the completion of the ITP the contact person of each country will act as mediator and 
facilitator between the museum and the educational setting. The product of this collaboration will be 
the setup of museum visits with corresponding museum educational programmes adapted for 
individuals with visual disabilities. It is expected to highlight all good practices which will emerge during 
these visits from both sides (museums and educational settings). The product of VA2 constitutes 
reports referring to reflective logs conducted by museum staff and educators indicating the pros and 
the cons during the museum visits. Based on this data the contact person will provide a summary of 
best practices that were adopted by educational settings and museums to make these visits fruitful in 
terms of active participation.  
2.2.3 Horizontal Activities (HA) 
HA1. This level of activities referred to the networking actions that concern all educational settings and 
museums that are involved in the BaGMIVI project. The reflective phases from these networking 
actions will provide data enabling the Coordinating Group of the BaGMIVI project in conjunction with 
the contact persons of every partner to reflect on the collected data and move on to the next step of 
re-planning and acting. It is expected that a common methodology will be shaped and also two guides 
for teachers and museum staff respectively will be published to support the sustainability of the 
project.  
HA2. All museums which participated in ITPs as well as the teachers of the participating schools will 
be able to upload their best practices accompanied with photos and videos to the project site 
(http://www.bagmivi.eu) or to sites of their organisations sharing knowledge and experience. In this 
way the BaGMIVI consortium will be able to disseminate its actions and activities to other educators 
and museums that are interested in educational innovations, teaching methods, curriculum 
adaptations, integrated curriculum, haptic apprehension, design and development of appropriate 
tactile material, and last but not least social integration.  
HA3. Transnational meetings of museum staff and contact persons have been conducted and are still 
in progress in order to exchange practices, experience making all necessary modifications or 
adaptation regarding the implementation phases of the project. Finally, sustainability is considered as 
the cornerstone of all horizontal activities and it will be feasible via conferences at local and European 
level.  
3 
RESULTS: EVENTS AND INTELLECTUAL OUTPUTS (IO) 
The expected results ("intellectual" or events) of the overall project execution and its lifetime are the 
following:  
IO1: A needs assessment study. As we mentioned before the needs assessment study has been 
completed in which has been described the level of access and inclusion of individuals with visual 
4512

disabilities to the museums and the requirements for the development of an inclusive museum in 
relation to the individuals with visual disabilities. In order to conduct the needs assessment study, the 
following activities took place: i) initially a literature review was conducted with research data and 
theoretical perspectives regarding museums and people with visual disabilities, ii) a thorough search 
of databases took place to search for publications relevant to the topic of BaGMIVI project, iii)  a local 
search took place in journals, reports, local news and books, which often cannot be traced through 
databases, and iv) semi-structured interviews with individuals with visual disabilities and teachers of 
students with visual disabilities were conducted to explore their experiences and perspectives 
regarding the level of accessibility and inclusion of individuals with visual disabilities regarding 
museums and similar cultural centres.   
IO2: A joint syllabus for the training of the museum staff is also completed, which was based on the 
needs assessment study. The joint syllabus was developed for the training of the museum staff. The 
syllabus included the objectives of the training, the learning outcomes, the thematic areas and the 
content in each area and the assessment methods to examine whether the objectives have been met. 
Furthermore, the syllabus may be used in the future by the trained museum staff who want to organise 
in-service training seminars for their own benefit or it may be used by another museum. Therefore, it 
will be accessible to everybody who does not participate to the project and be interested to read and 
use such a syllabus. This output will be distributed to all participating museums and galleries of the 
BaGMIVI project for the museum staff training.    
IO3: The BaGMIVI portal. The BaGMIVI portal is constructed (http://www.bagmivi.eu) and includes 
three distinct sections public dissemination, private collaboration, and e-learning module.  
IO4: Training events. It is expected that during the training events (ITP), members of the museum staff 
have acquired knowledge and skills to encounter visitors with visual disabilities as a heterogeneous 
group and have learned to organize special programmes for people with visual disabilities. This event 
is of great importance because it will help all BaGMIVI partners who are actively involved in museums 
and galleries to develop differentiated and accessible museum programmes.  
IO5: Differentiated and accessible material of all participating museums staff will be produced and 
video-recorded to enhance the access and inclusion of individuals with visual disabilities during their 
museum visits. The museum staff in collaboration with individuals with visual disabilities are designing 
and developing the accessible material by following the principles that they learnt during the training 
and which are included in the syllabus. For each school visit, the museum staff will set the objectives, 
describe the content/programme, and decide how to evaluate whether the objectives have been met. 
IO6: A guide with the best practices regarding ways of differentiated museum content. It is expected to 
produce a best practices guide which will include an analysis of the data gathered through visitors’ and 
museum staff’s reflective logs. More analytically, the experiences of the participants, their emotions, 
their concerns, the challenges encountered and how they dealt with them are some of issues that will 
be included within the best practices guide. For example, the visitors may comment that at the 
beginning of the museum visits they were not very satisfied with the museums services while gradually 
the level of services was improved. The museum staff may describe how they dealt with the 
challenging task of differentiating artworks and also how they met the diverse needs of their visitors 
with visual impairments.  
It is expected that all the above results will have an impact at personal and societal level. In specific, it 
is expected that since individuals with visual disabilities will actively participate in the development of 
accessible materials they will acquire self-advocacy skills. Also, a collaborative network between 
museums, schools and associations is expected to be developed as well as a sustainable learning 
community is expected to be created during the BaGMIVI’s duration involving all  relevant 
stakeholders who will have the chance to interact through the BaGMIVI site, to exchange their 
experience and ideas, share their concerns and improve their methods and techniques. 
Also, the BaGMIVI project will develop and test a concrete methodology for the exploitation of 
differentiated museum content in general, for blind students’ information and education in general. In 
particular, it is expected that the differentiated museum content will enable blind students to formulate 
more concise mental representations of the museum exhibits. The usage of appropriate haptic 
material and appropriate museum educational programmes will facilitate the perceptive mechanisms 
of the “shape” of the world in which students with visual disabilities are involved in and build up a 
comprehensive map and communicative skills. Finally, it is expected that the differentiated museum 
content will constitute a very important educational tool for the education of students with visual 
4513

disabilities which may have a significant impact on their development of literacy skills, their 
employment and their quality in life, in general. 
Last but not least, it is expected that the broad community of the museums, schools and associations 
for and of the blind will be informed about the actions and results of the BaGMIVI project. This is 
argued because the project partners are already widely experienced at disseminating information 
through publication in scientific journals, conferences and exhibitions and several of them have 
convenient access to audiences. ICEVI-Europe and EBU, by centrally representing the pan-European 
community of the blind and visually impaired will act as the central points for dissemination activities. 
4 
DISCUSSION 
The project “Bridging the Gap between Museums and Individuals with Visual Impairments” (BaGMIVI) 
lies in its synthetic character which combines the contemporary role of the museums, the socio-
anthropological paradigm for disability and the influence of many political and social movements of 
people with disabilities as well as many documents regarding the rights of people with disability and 
human rights in general. As a result, it is argued that it fully supports the social agenda of the 
European Union on non-discrimination, equal opportunities of individuals with visual disabilities 
through the “cultural gates” of the museums and galleries. Another characteristic constitutes the 
development and validation of methodologies, workshops and patterns of collaboration among 
museums, associations of the blind, NGOs, IT Company, universities and schools for the blind for the 
exploitation of appropriate differentiated museum content building bridges among them and share 
knowledge through the method of action research. 
Furthermore, the innovation of this project can be justified by the production of outputs that may be 
used as Open Educational Resources, namely the syllabus, videos from museum staff training events, 
the development of differentiated museum content/programmes and the best practices guide, as well 
as a policy recommendations and guidelines.  Also, the best practices guide will include innovative 
features in the sense of introducing recommendations into how to convert a visual image (e.g. a 
painting) into a tactile form based on the principles of differentiation and design for all. 
The BaGMIVI project is complimentary to other European projects already carried out which either 
focus on accessibility and equal opportunities for people with visual or other disabilities and on the role 
of museums for the society and the need for training the museum staff.  Specifically, BaGMIVI is 
complimentary to projects that focus on accessibility for equal opportunities issues such as 
accommodation & catering accessibility for disability, vocational education of visually impaired people 
via distance education, audio description-lifelong access for the blind, dialoguing museums in a new 
cultural democracy, professionalization for learning in technology and science, museum 
communicator, lifelong museum learning, on-line learning to improve quality of life. 
Finally, it is argued that the present project has an intensive innovative character because no Lifelong 
Learning Programme project so far aimed to enhance the inclusion and access of people with visual 
disabilities as well as other disabilities to the museums.  Also, it will be the first time that a consortium 
with organisations that work exclusively for and with people who are blind or visually impaired will train 
museum staff regarding the accessibility needs of individuals with visual impairments and involve the 
museum staff and the visitors with visual impairments in joint development of accessible museum 
exhibits and programmes the results of which will be shared through a European portal as Open 
Educational Resources. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The present project entitled “BaGMIVI: Bridging the Gap between Museums and Individuals with 
Visual Impairments” (Project Agreement Number 2014-1-EL01-KA200-001631) is funded by the 
Erasmus+ programme of the European Union and co-ordinated by the State Scholarships Foundation 
(IKY). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Argyropoulos, V., & Kanari, C. (2015). Re-imagining the Museums through “Touch”: Reflections 
of Individuals with Visual Disability on their Experience of Museum-visiting in Greece. ALTER, 
European Journal of Disability Research 9, pp. 130-143. 
4514

[2] 
Barnes, C., Mercer, G., & Shakespeare, T. (1999). Exploring Disability. A Sociological 
Introduction. Cambridge: Policy Press. 
[3] 
Oliver, M. (1990). The Politics of Disablement. London: Macmillan. 
[4] 
Moussouri, T. (2007). Implications of the Social Model of Disability for Visitor Research. Visitors 
Studies, 10 (1), pp. 90-106. 
[5] 
Black, G. (2005). The Engaging Museum. Developing Museums for Visitor Involvement. London 
– N.Y.: Routledge. 
[6] 
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (1999). The Educational Role of the Museum. London: Routledge. 
[7] 
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (2007). Museum and Education. Purpose, Pedagogy, Performance. 
London-NY: Routledge. 
[8] 
Sandell, R. (2002). Museums, Society, Inequality. London: Routledge. 
[9] 
Vergo, P. (1989). The new Museology. London: Reaktion Books. 
[10] 
International Council of Museums (2007). Museum Definition. Retrieved by 
http://icom.museum/the-vision/museum-definition/ 
[11] 
Merriman, N. (1999). Opening up Museums to the Public. Archaeology and Arts 72, pp. 43-46 
(in Greek). 
[12] 
United Nations (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Retrieved by 
http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/ 
[13] 
United Nations (2006). United Nations Conventions on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 
Retrieved by http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/rights/convtexte.htm#convtext 
[14] 
Weisen, M. (2008). How Accessible are Museums Today? In H. J. Chatterjee (ed.) Touch in 
Museums. Policy and Practice in Object Handling. Oxford-New York: BERG.  
[15] 
Dodd, J., & Sandell, R. (1998). Building Bridges. Guidance for Museums and Galleries on 
Developing New Audiences. London: Museums and Galleries Commission Publications. 
[16] 
ADA (1990). Americans with Disabilities Act, accessed November, 23, 2014, 
http://www.ada.gov/2010_regs.htm 
[17] 
DDA (1995). Disability Discrimination Act, Retrieved by 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1995/50/contents 
[18] 
Sandell, R. & Dodd, J. (2010). Activist Practice. In R. Sandell & J. Dodd & R. Garland-Thomson 
(Ed.), Re-presenting Disability, Activism and Agency in the Museum. London: Routledge. 
[19] 
Bοussaid, M. (2004). Access of Individuals with Visual Impairments: Reality and Prospects. In 
A. Tsitouri (ed.) Access of People with Disabilities in Spaces of Culture and Sport. Proceedings, 
pp. 55-59. Athens: Ministry of Culture (in Greek). 
[20] 
EBU (2012). EBU Access to Culture Survey 2012. Mapping Current Levels of Accessibility to 
Cultural Venues and Activities in Europe, Retrieved by http://www.euroblind.org/working-
areas/access-to-culture/nr/1315. 
[21] 
Dufreney-Trinchinetti, F. (2004). Issues of Access to Culture of People with Disabilities. In A. 
Tsitouri (Ed.) Access of People with Disabilities in Spaces of Culture and Sport. Proceedings, 
pp. 65-69. Athens: Ministry of Culture (in Greek). 
[22] 
Pearson, A. & Aloysious, C. (1994). The Big Foot. Museums and Children with Learning 
Difficulties. London: Trustees of the British Museum. British Museum Press. 
[23] 
Vemi, V., & Kanari, H. (2008). School Teachers and Museum Education: A Κey Factor in 
Expanding the Inclusive Character of Museums. The International Journal of the Inclusive 
Museum, 1, pp. 1-8. 
[24] 
Hetherington, K. (2000). Museums and the Visually Impaired: The Spatial Politics of Access, 
The Sociological Review, 48, pp. 444-463. 
4515

[25] 
Krivec, T., Muck, T., Fugger G., R., Majnaric´, I., & Golob, G. (2014). Adapting Artworks for 
People Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired Using Raised Printing. Journal of Visual Impairment 
& Blindness, 108(1), pp. 68-76. 
[26] 
De Coster, K., & Loots, G. (2004). Somewhere in Between Touch and Vision: In Search of a 
Meaningful Art Education for Blind Individuals. Journal of Art and Design Education, 23, pp. 
326-334. 
[27] 
Candlin, F. (2003). Blindness, art and exclusion in museums and galleries. International Journal 
of Art and Design Education, 22, pp. 100-110. 
[28] 
Kanari, H., & Argyropoulos,V. (2014). Museum Educational Programmes for Children with 
Visual Disabilities. The International Journal of the Inclusive Museum, 6 (3), pp. 13 – 26. 
[29] 
Reich, C., Lindgren-Streicher, A., Beyer, M., Levent, N., Pursley, J. & Mesiti, L.A. (2011). 
Speaking Out on Art and Museums: A Study on the Needs and Preferences of Adults who are 
Blind or Have Low Vision. Report. Museum of Science, Boston & Art Beyond Sight, Retrieved 
by 
https://www.imamuseum.org/sites/default/files/attachments/IMA_ABS_Speaking_Out_on_Art_a
nd_Museums_Report_1.pdf. 
[30] 
Feldman, A., & Minstrell, J. (2000). Action Research as a Research Methodology for the Study 
of the Teaching and Learning of Science. In A. E. Kelly & R. A. Lesh (Eds), Research Design in 
Mathematics and Science Education. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers: London. 
[31] 
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (1988). The Action Research Planner, (3rd ed.), Victoria, 
Australia: Deakin University. 
[32] 
O’Hanlon, C. (1996). Why is Action Research a Valid Basis for Professional Development? In R. 
McBride (Ed.), Teacher Education Policy: Some Issues Arising from Research and Practice, pp. 
179-191. Falmer Press: London. 
4516

