 
 
 
Copyright Undertaking 
 
This thesis is protected by copyright, with all rights reserved.  
By reading and using the thesis, the reader understands and agrees to the following terms: 
1. The reader will abide by the rules and legal ordinances governing copyright regarding the 
use of the thesis. 
2. The reader will use the thesis for the purpose of research or private study only and not for 
distribution or further reproduction or any other purpose. 
3. The reader agrees to indemnify and hold the University harmless from and against any loss, 
damage, cost, liability or expenses arising from copyright infringement or unauthorized 
usage. 
 
 
IMPORTANT 
If you have reasons to believe that any materials in this thesis are deemed not suitable to be 
distributed in this form, or a copyright owner having difficulty with the material being included in 
our database, please contact lbsys@polyu.edu.hk providing details.  The Library will look into 
your claim and consider taking remedial action upon receipt of the written requests. 
 
 
 
 
 
Pao Yue-kong Library, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
http://www.lib.polyu.edu.hk 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENHANCING THE MUSEUM EXPERIENCE FOR VISUALLY IMPAIRED 
PEOPLE IN HONG KONG:  
HAPTIC-AUDIO INTERACTION DESIGN (HAID) 
 
 
CHAN MENG KHEONG  
Ph.D 
 
 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
 
2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  
ii	  
 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
School of Design 
 
 
 
 
 
Enhancing the Museum Experience for Visually Impaired People in Hong Kong:  
Haptic-Audio Interaction Design (HAID) 
 
 
CHAN Meng Kheong  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for  
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
 
February 2016 
 
 
 

iii	  
CERTIFICATE OF ORIGINALITY 
I hereby declare that this thesis is my own work and that, to the best of my 
knowledge and belief, it reproduces no material previously published or written, 
nor material that has been accepted for the award of any other degree or diploma, 
except where due acknowledgement has been made in the text. 
___________________________ 
CHAN Meng Kheong 

	  
iv	  
ABSTRACT 
 
How can Hong Kong museums enhance the experiences of their visually impaired 
visitors? Visually impaired individuals face major challenges in visually oriented 
environments such as museums. With this in mind, in-depth field observations 
and interviews at the 11 major museums in Hong Kong were conducted. Proposed 
case studies with pilot testing and interviews were also conducted to investigate 
the effectiveness of a touch-activated sound system that could be adopted in 
museum environments. This proposed conceptual system integrated exhibit 
information into tactile diagrams that could be easily accessed by visually 
impaired individuals. The study aimed to gather information that would help 
visually impaired and blind individuals to understand and construct mental images 
of two-dimensional exhibits.  
 
 
The main goal was to create a conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype 
using the cross-modal interaction approach (a combination of tactile diagrams and 
audio descriptions) that could provide multisensory feedback to the visually 
impaired and enable them to ‘see’ the museum exhibits without having to touch 
the original exhibits. The results of the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype 
indicated that the cross-modalities interaction approach has great potential for 
helping the visually impaired construct clearer mental images. The key findings 
and recommendations are presented in this thesis, along with the characteristics of 
interactivity of the visually impaired participants in this study. These findings 

	  
v	  
should be used in the future to develop a haptic-audio interaction design museum 
platform.  
 
 
In this study, a qualitative research approach was adopted with case 
studies that focused on the cross-modal interaction design to assess how 
multisensory feedback could be provided to visually impaired visitors, construct 
clearer mental images of exhibits and thus enable meaningful museum 
experiences. First, the literature and documents were reviewed to obtain an in-
depth understanding of previous works relating to this study and investigate how 
museums understand and perform their roles in supporting visually impaired 
visitors. The findings of various studies and projects showed that museum 
environments, exhibitions and programmes still fail to consider the actual wants 
and needs of visually impaired visitors. Second, in-depth field observations and 
interviews with major museums in Hong Kong revealed that the visually impaired 
are a little-noticed segment of the museum audience and are offered few basic 
facilities and resources to aid their mobility and access to information about 
museum exhibits.  
 
Third, semi-structured interviews using open-ended questions were 
conducted with visually impaired participants. The participants were asked about 
their viewpoints on, feelings about and understanding of subjects that could be 
personal and subjective. A pilot study found that many visually impaired 
individuals in Hong Kong were reluctant to visit museums because they felt 

	  
vi	  
excluded. Fourth, a second pilot study was conducted using another set of semi-
structured interview questions. The selected visually impaired participants took 
part in tests of three medium-fidelity conceptual tactile paper prototypes that were 
supported by audio descriptions. The prototypes simulated the effect of 
multisensory feedback to investigate the effectiveness of touch-activated sound 
systems that integrated exhibit information with tactile diagrams. The participants 
were asked to draw the mental images they constructed during the tests to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the integrated platform. They were indeed able to 
capture some of the visual elements of the exhibits.  
 
 
The results of the case studies demonstrated an understanding of the value 
of tactual and audio interpretation of the visual information of museum exhibits as 
an accessible medium for visually impaired visitors. They also revealed that 
dialogue between the visually impaired and museums could be enhanced by 
paying special attention to museum exhibits through the proposed cross-modal 
approach, i.e., the haptic-audio interaction design (HAID) system, and by 
rethinking and shifting the current perspective on an inclusive museum experience 
to enhance that experience for the visually impaired. Access to visual information 
about museum exhibits is crucial for visually impaired visitors, who need to 
construct mental images of exhibits that are detailed enough to make them feel 
their museum experience is worthwhile and meaningful. 
 
 

	  
vii	  
LIST OF PUBLICATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
Some of the work described in this thesis has been published and/or presented as 
follows. 
Chan, M. K., & Siu, K. W. M. (2016). Inclusive culture heritage environments: 
Helping the visually impaired and older adults with low vision ‘see’ exhibits in 
Hong Kong museums. Proceedings of the RAIS Annual International Symposium 
2016 – Smart Cities (RAIS2016), The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, The 
Research Institute for Sustainable Urban Development, Hong Kong (accepted). 
 
Chan, M. K., & Siu, K. W. M. (2013). Inclusivity: A study of Hong Kong 
museum environments. International Journal of Critical Cultural Studies. 11(1), 
45–61. 
 
Chan, M. K., & Siu, K. W. M. (2013). Helping visually impaired visitors ‘see’ 
exhibits in Hong Kong museums. Proceedings of the Include Asia Conference on 
Inclusive Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, The School of Design, 
2013, Hong Kong. 
 
Project Presentations 
PhD Seminar Winter Session 2016, presented by the Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, The School of Design, Hong Kong, 26–28 January 2016. 

	  
viii	  
 
Art Beyond Sight’s Project Access International Fellowship Training, presented 
by Art Beyond Sight, New York City, USA, 14–18 October 2013. 
 
The 11th International Conference on New Directions in the Humanities, presented 
by Common Ground Publishing at Eötvös Loránd University in Budapest, 
Hungary, 19–21 June 2013. 
 
Funding Presentations 
The following sponsorship and funding was obtained for the HAID project. 
Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development Fund (SIE Fund) – Good 
Seed Programme (2015), Institute for Entrepreneurship, Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Hong Kong. 
 
UnLtd Hong Kong Start-up Fund (2016), UnLtd Hong Kong Foundation, Hong 
Kong. 
 
The PolyU Micro Fund (2016), Institute for Entrepreneurship, Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (funding awarded). 

	  
ix	  
Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development Fund (SIE Fund) – Good 
Seed Programme (2016), Institute for Entrepreneurship, Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Hong Kong (funding awarded). 

	  
x	  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I owe tremendous thanks to my Lord Jesus Christ and the universe for their 
guidance and wisdom. 
 
I would especially like to express my greatest gratitude and appreciation to 
my supervisor Professor Kin Wai Michael Siu for his unconditional care, support, 
guidance and enormous patience with every aspect of my research. It has been a 
true honour to be your student and it is something I will always cherish. This 
thesis would not be a reality without you. This experience will always be an 
important part of my life. 
 
I would like to express my thanks to Professor Tim Jachna in the School of 
Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, for his generous advice and 
insightful guidance on my study.  
 
I would like to express my thanks to The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University and Research Grants Council for providing funding support for my 
study. 
 
I would like to thank the Hong Kong Blind Union for providing 
information related to the visually impaired and blind, and all of the participants 
for their participation in all of the pilot studies and interviews. I would also like to 

	  
xi	  
thank the Hong Kong Museum of Art for their kind consideration and valuable 
information for the case studies in Hong Kong. 
 
I would like to thank the founder of Art Beyond Sight, New York, Miss 
Elisabeth Salzhauer Axel, and the team members, Miss Nina Sobol Levent and Mr 
Lou Giansante, for their generous guidance and advice for my study. I sincerely 
appreciate them for designating me one of their International Access Fellows. 
 
This has definitely been a long journey, and it would not have been 
possible without the support of my friends and family. To my mother, sister and 
niece: you are the greatest family in the world. To my greatest friends Eireen, 
Chiat, Bee, Dabien, Chloe, Christine and Randy: thank you for the unconditional 
love, care and endless support. I would never have survived without you during 
this tough learning journey over the past years.  
 
Finally, my deepest thanks go to my friends and family members who are 
no longer with me. I know you are always here for me and have been with me all 
these years. I love you all, and I still think about you a lot. 
 
 
CHAN Meng Kheong 
February 2016 

	  
xii	  
CONTENTS 
 
CERTIFICATE OF ORIGINALITY  
 
 
 
 
ii 
ABSTRACT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
LIST OF PUBLICATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 
 
vi 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
 
 
 
 
ix 
CONTENTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xi 
LIST OF FIGURES  
 
 
 
 
                    xviii 
 
 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 
 
1 
 
1.1 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND  
 
2
 
1.2  
RESEARCH AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
 
8 
 
1.3 
RESEARCH GUIDING QUESTIONS 
 
 
11 
 
1.4 
FRAMEWORK AND SCOPE OF STUDY  
 
13 
 
1.5 
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY  
 
 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
 
 
21 
 
2.1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
2.2  
VISUAL IMPAIRMENTS AND BLINDNESS 
 
24 
 
2.3  
WHAT IS A MUSEUM? 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
 
2.3.1 A Brief History of Museums in Hong Kong 
 
36 
 
 
2.3.2 Museums and Visually Impaired People 
 
40 

	  
xiii	  
 
2.4  
VISUAL PERCEPTION 
 
 
 
 
     44 
2.5 
 ACCESSIBILITY 
 
 
 
 
 
     48 
 
 
2.5.1 Accessibility of Visual Information  
 
     57 
 
 
2.5.2 Visualisation and Mental Visual Imagery 
 
     59 
 
2.6  
HAPTIC INTERACTION (TOUCH)  
 
 
     60
 
2.7  
AUDIO INTERACTION (HEARING) 
 
 
     69 
 
2.8  
HAPTIC-AUDIO INTERACTION DESIGN (HAID) 
     76 
 
2.9  
CROSS-MODAL INTERACTION  
 
 
     81 
 
 
2.9.1 Ubiquitous Computing  
 
 
 
     84 
 
 
2.9.2 Embodied Interaction 
 
 
 
 
     86 
 
2.10 
PHENOMENOLOGY AND MUSEUMS 
 
 
      88 
 
 
2.10.1 Phenomenological Framework 
 
 
      91 
 
 
2.10.2 Museum Experience  
 
 
 
      94 
2.11 
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF 
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (PWDS)  
 
      98 
2.12 
THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION (EOC) AND 
DISABILITIES DISCRIMINATION ORDINANCE (DDO)     102 
 
2.13 
SUMMARY  
 
 
 
 
 
      104 
 
Chapter 3  
METHODOLOGY AND METHODS 
 
 
      106
 
3.1 
RESEARCH OVERVIEW 
 
 
 
 
      107 
 
 
3.1.1 Case Study 
 
 
 
 
 
      114 
 
 
3.1.2  Types of Case Study  
 
 
 
      117 

	  
xiv	  
 
3.2 
DATA COLLECTION 
 
 
 
 
      120 
 
 
3.2.1  Documents 
 
 
 
 
 
      121 
 
 
3.2.2  Field Observation 
 
 
 
 
      122 
 
 
3.2.3  Interview and Pilot Study 
 
 
 
      124 
 
 
3.2.4 Paper Prototyping 
 
 
 
 
      129 
 
3.3 
VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY 
 
 
 
      131 
3.4 
SUMMARY  
 
 
 
 
 
      132 
 
Chapter 4 
CASE STUDY: HONG KONG MUSEUM  
ENVIRONMENTS  
 
 
 
 
      135 
4.1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 
      136 
4.2 
FIELD OBSERVATIONS: HONG KONG MUSEUMS 
      139 
 
 
4.2.1 Procedure 
 
 
 
 
 
      140 
 
 
4.2.2 Results  
 
 
 
 
 
      141 
 
4.3 
USER NEEDS ANALYSIS AND FIRST PILOT STUDY       144 
 
 
4.3.1 Procedure 
 
 
 
 
 
      145 
 
 
4.3.2 Results  
 
 
 
 
 
      148 
 
4.4 
CONCEPTUAL TACTILE-AUDIO PAPER PROTOTYPING  
AND SECOND PILOT STUDY  
 
 
 
      150 
4.4.1 Procedure 
 
 
 
 
 
      152 
 
 
4.4.2 Results  
 
 
 
 
 
      157 

	  
xv	  
 
 
4.5 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR  
 
CASE STUDIES 
 
 
 
 
 
      160 
 
Chapter 5 
CRITICAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
      163 
 
5.1  
INTEGRATION OF TOUCH (HAPTIC) AND  
SOUND (AUDIO) FOR THE VISUALLY IMPAIRED 
      164 
5.2  
SINGLE MODALITY OR CROSS-MODALITIES  
      168 
 
5.3  
PROBLEM WITH DIRECT REPLICAS 
 
 
      169 
 
Chapter 6 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 
 
      171 
 
6.1 
ANSWERS TO THE RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
 
      172 
 
6.2 
REVISITING THE RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
 
      174 
 
6.3 
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
 
 
 
      177 
 
6.4 
POSSIBLE FUTURE WORKS 
 
 
 
      179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIXES 
Appendix 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      184 
Appendix 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      186 
Appendix 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      187 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      190

	  
xvi	  
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
Figure 1:  Framework and scope of study structure diagram showing the flow of 
research activities and the links to chapters within the research 
components ------------------------------------------------------------------ 14 
 
Figure 2:  Visual problems rank second for people with registered disabilities in 
Hong Kong (SCMP, 2010) ------------------------------------------------ 26	  
 
Figure 3:  Categories of visual impairment based on WHO standard ----------- 28 
 
Figure 4: 
‘Unlocking the value of cultural heritage’, with illustrative four-layer 
model ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32 
 
Figure 5: 
New Hong Kong City Hall, with the Low Block facing the Queen’s 
Pier and the Memorial Garden and High Block to the right. The old 
Bank of China and HSBC buildings are in the background ---------- 38 
 
Figure 6:  Data collection framework ---------------------------------------------- 120 
 
 
Figure 7: 
First tactile diagram – ‘Spot UV’ or ‘spot varnished’ printing 
technique that had a tactile effect --------------------------------------- 147 

	  
xvii	  
 
Figure 8:  Second tactile diagram – ‘Thick pigment’ layer that provided a soft 
and embossed tactile surface -------------------------------------------- 147 
 
Figure 9: 
Third tactile diagram – Printed on microcapsule papers (swell paper); 
recommended by Art Beyond Sight ----------------------------------- 148 
 
Figure 10:  User-centred design process model; ISO 13407 (1999) -------------153 
 
Figure 11:  Tactile diagram – ‘Mona Lisa’ by Leonardo da Vinci ---------------154 
 
Figure 12:  Tactile diagram – ‘The Persistence of Memory’ by Salvador Dali -155 
 
Figure 13:  HAID simulated tactile paper prototype – To create the sensation of 
pressing a button to activate the ‘point description’ function on the 
prototype, metals pins were embedded in the back of the diagram. The 
diagram was glued to a form board, which simulated haptic force 
feedback when participants pressed on the tactile surface -----------157 
 
Figure 14:  Drawing test – The shape and spatial composition of the visual 
elements are well captured ---------------------------------------------- 159 
 

	  
xviii	  
Figure 15:  Drawing test – The shape of the object is very close to the  
original visual element --------------------------------------------------- 159 
 
Figure 16:  Drawing test – The participant identified the visual elements  
in the tactile diagram and their spatial composition ----------------- 162

	  
1	  
CHAPTER 1  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
  
   
 
 
 
Overview 
A traditional museum environment is a building that 
contains untouchable two- and three-dimensional 
exhibits that are presented to visitors. This study 
explores the potential of using haptic (touch) and audio 
(sound) interaction design approaches to enhance the 
museum experience of visually impaired visitors. This 
chapter introduces the key components of this thesis, 
including the introduction and background of this 
research study and a brief description of its scope to 
demonstrate its focus and implementation. The 
appropriate research aims and objectives are identified 
and guided by the formulated research guiding 
questions. The projected significance of the study 
follows along with the study framework, projecting the 
flows and relationships considered in the individual 
chapters. 

	  
2	  
“Hearing is a form of touch. Something that’s so hard to describe, something that 
comes, sound that comes to you... You feel it through your body, and, sometimes, it 
almost hits your face.” – Evelyn Glennie, Touch the Sound. 
	  
1.1 
 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
 
Statistics report No. 62, ‘Persons with disabilities and chronic diseases’, released by 
the Census and Statistics Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region (2014), indicates that approximately 178,000 people in Hong Kong are 
visually impaired (2.4% of the total population) and that 78,000 are blind. In recent 
years, policymakers, researchers, engineers, architects, designers and manufacturers 
have discussed various approaches to improving the daily mobility and accessibility 
of visually impaired and blind individuals. According to Glinert and York (2008), 
although great strides have been made in developing assistive technology for blind 
people, blindness remains a priority for accessibility researchers. Most studies 
relating to visually impaired people have focused on such aspects as accessible virtual 
environments, on-line interfaces, mobile devices, navigation and way-finding (see 
Ciolfi & Bannon, 2002; Moreno et al., 2008; Santoro et al., 2007; Choras et al., 2011; 
Sánchez et al., 2013). Very few studies have focused on how visually impaired and 
blind visitors receive visual information about exhibits in museums (see Salgado & 
Salmi, 2006; Shiose et al., 2010; Reichinger et al., 2011; Carfagni et al., 2012). 
Despite much effort, individuals who are visually impaired are still facing major 

	  
3	  
challenges in visually oriented environments such as museums and galleries. The 
ability to access information about museum exhibits is crucial for the visually 
impaired to construct mental images of those exhibits. 
 
Carfagni et al. (2012) stated that the visually impaired are inevitably 
disadvantaged in the enjoyment of artworks, which are usually created for sighted 
people. They also mentioned that the ability of the visually impaired to access 
cultural and artistic areas is affected by not only their mobility and spatial navigation, 
but also their inability to sense the artworks themselves. According to vom Lehn 
(2010) the visually impaired are a little-noticed segment of the museum audience, but 
they still often visit visual-art-related exhibitions. Hooper-Greenhill et al. (2000) and 
the Social Exclusion Task Force (2006) argued that visually impaired visitors interact 
with companions and use the tactile technological and human resources provided by 
museums to make sense of their exhibits. Information and interpretation resources 
designed for the visually impaired have become commonplace in museums located in 
the UK, continental Europe and the US, where policymakers and museum 
representatives have been pursuing agendas of social inclusion (see also Catherine, 
2005; RNIB, 2009). Such agendas have addressed the exclusion of certain parts of the 
population from accessing public resources due to their physical or mental abilities. 
Many studies have indicated that the resultant improvements have been minimal, but 

	  
4	  
even limited improvements have yet to be seen in the major museums of Hong Kong 
(see Appendix 1). 
 
According to Moreno et al. (2008), in recent years many museums located in 
the UK, continental Europe and the US, both public and private, have set up 
initiatives to create portable devices that make museum visits accessible to visitors 
with different types of needs, particularly visitors with physical constraints or 
impairments. Moreno et al. (2008) further commented that ‘these devices are of a 
diverse nature and they enrich the visitor’s experience, though this is not their 
primary purpose’. Most studies have focused on accessible virtual environments, on-
line interfaces, navigation and way-finding and so on, with very few focusing on the 
accessibility of how visually impaired people and blind visitors receive information 
about the exhibits. 
 
Based on a publication by Gougoux et al. (2004), many studies in the past 
decade have investigated and confirmed that visually impaired people have superior 
abilities in relation to non-visual perceptual tasks including pitch change direction 
discrimination, verbal memory (Amedi, Raz, Pianka, Malach, & Zohary, 2003; 
Roder, Rosler, & Neville, 2001; Hull & Mason, 1995), speech discrimination 
(Niemeyer & Starlinger, 1981), sound localisation (Gougoux, Zatorre, Lassonde, 

	  
5	  
Voss, & Lepore, 2005) and tactile discrimination (Goldreich & Kanics, 2003; Van 
Boven, Hamilton, Kauffman, Keenan, & Pascual-Leone, 2000). 
 
The literature also shows a recent trend in the increased use of embedded 
technological support in services and products suitable for different users in multiple 
contexts, including people with physical constraints. Technologies have created new 
opportunities that allow users to improve their day-to-day living difficulties and to 
perform activities or access unfamiliar environments previously considered 
impossible or challenging (e.g., to navigate spaces and appreciate art in a museum 
environment). 
 
 
With the frequent use and advancement of sensory and cross-modal 
technology, there is enormous potential to exploit handheld devices (mobile phones, 
PDAs, MP3/4s and touch-screen devices) for use with these assistive technologies. 
To achieve such results, accessibility principles should be applied when developing 
products or services. ‘Accessibility’ is a general term used to indicate that products 
(e.g., a device, a service or an environment) should be accessible to as many people 
as possible, including those with physical constraints. Ghiani, Leporini and Paterno 
(2009) stated that increased accessibility must be an important feature of systems or 
products to allow users with different abilities to access or use them. 

	  
6	  
To understand cross-modal interaction, it is crucial to determine where and 
how information from different senses is combined, especially for users who have 
special needs and physical constraints. Jansson and Juhasz (2007) stated that users 
with severe visual impairment have to work without obtaining information from the 
sense of vision, making task performance more difficult. It is therefore especially 
hard for a visually impaired person to get an overview of an interface and to find and 
explore objects and details. 
 
According to Haans and Ijsselsteihn (2005), touch (haptic) and sound (audio) 
are very powerful for visual communication and can play an important role in our 
daily lives. Touch and sound are even more crucial for individuals who are visually 
impaired and blind. Much of the benefits of haptic and audio interaction are seen in 
situations where users may be unable to use a visual display. In such situations, the 
haptic and audio modalities must shoulder the responsibility that would otherwise be 
undertaken by one’s sense of sight. This requires the efficient use of the bandwidth of 
this modality (McGookin & Brewster, 2006). The integration of haptic and audio in 
effect serves as the ‘eyes’ for a visually impaired person, as it relates to evoking the 
simulation of art forms, visual connection, imagination and mental visual imagery 
through the perceiving and understanding of appropriate visual information. 
 
 

	  
7	  
According to Stein and Meredith (1993), ‘Merging information across senses 
provides a comprehensive “picture” of sensory objects and is necessary for a reliable 
interaction with our environment’. Studies of the use of haptic and audio technology 
have grown rapidly because of recent flexible and cost-efficient software 
advancements, particularly as it relates to mobile technologies, touch-sensitive 
surfaces and tangible devices. According to Glinert and York (2008), although great 
strides have been made in developing	  assistive technology for blind people, blindness 
remains a priority for accessibility researchers. Most studies relating to visually 
impaired people have focused on such aspects as accessible virtual environments, 
Web interfaces, mobile devices, navigation and way-finding (Ciolfi & Bannon, 2002; 
Moreno et al., 2008; Santoro et al., 2007; Choras et al., 2011; Sánchez et al., 2013). 
Very few studies have focused on how visually impaired and blind visitors receive 
visual information about exhibits in museums (see Salgado & Salmi, 2006; Shiose et 
al., 2010; Reichinger et al., 2011; Carfagni et al., 2012). Despite much effort, the 
visually impaired continue to face major challenges in visually oriented environments 
such as museums and galleries. The ability to access information about museum 
exhibits is crucial for the visually impaired when they construct mental images of 
those exhibits. 
 
When designing a haptic and audio interactive system, the designer must 
consider more complex design parameters, especially as it relates to the partially 

	  
8	  
sighted and visually impaired. The central research question this study aimed to 
address was how a cross-modal interaction approach such as haptic-audio interaction 
design (HAID) could help to improve the ability of visually impaired people to access 
visual information and construct mental images. The two key guiding questions were 
as follows. First, what are the key characteristics of interactivity for the visually 
impaired? Second, how can the characteristics of interactivity be incorporated into a 
HAID platform in a way that improves accessibility for visually impaired and blind 
people? Interactivity and accessibility of visual information issues are the key 
elements to consider when addressing these questions.  
 
1.2 
RESEARCH AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
Anne Pearson was a member of British Museum Education Service and the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. She stated that the needs of visually 
impaired people in relation to visual arts have long been seriously neglected, with 
policymakers and art managers failing to understand the nature of the need. 
Throughout her many years of personal experience with visually impaired visitors in 
museums, she was frequently asked by visitors without sight to describe the colour of 
artwork or objects. They explained that they needed this information because it added 
to the richness of their appreciation of the art piece. In her writing (published in the 
book Art Beyond Sight), she has mentioned that promoting touch alone is not the way 

	  
9	  
forward in art appreciation. She has suggested that with the integration of sound, 
smell, taste and texture, visitors experience many other senses and their awareness 
and enjoyment are heightened. 
 
The research outcome of this study should enhance the museum experience of 
visually impaired visitors by providing accessible visual information through a cross-
modal approach involving tactile printing and audio description of a museum exhibit. 
It was within the objectives of this study to examine purely visual information about 
two-dimensional exhibits. Case studies were conducted to observe and collect in-
depth data about visitor experiences and experiments that would help to bring this 
research to life.  
 
The research aims of this study can be divided into two areas: specific and 
general objectives. 
 
Specific Objectives: 
1. To investigate whether touch and audio description of untouchable visual 
information can interact with the aid of an accessible interface between 
visually impaired visitors and an untouchable museum exhibit; and 
 

	  
10	  
2. To explore the effectiveness of a system that integrates an exhibit’s visual 
information using the cross-modal interaction approach of HAID and how the 
system helps to improve the ability of the visually impaired to access visual 
information when constructing mental imagery. 
 
General Objectives: 
1. To analyse and understand the user experience of the HAID approach for 
visually impaired visitors in the museum environment; and 
2. To generate guidelines and information for policymakers, Equal Opportunities 
Commission (EOC) departments, museum managers and curators; to aid in 
the development of art and design education; and to help designers design 
specifically for visually impaired and blind persons. 
 
 
To achieve the previously stated objectives, this study proposed and 
developed a conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype with a HAID simulation 
approach for visually impaired and blind users. Participants were evaluated based on 
the cross-modal interaction approach via prototypes that provided low functionality 
and consisted of different tactile imagery and audio descriptions. The purpose was to 
investigate the effectiveness of an approach that could integrate an exhibit’s visual 
information with tactile displays and an auditory system that was easily accessible 

	  
11	  
and associable by visually impaired and blind museum visitors when constructing 
mental images of the exhibit. 
 
1.3 
RESEARCH GUIDING QUESTIONS 
 
 
The different human senses provide complementary views of environments, space, 
objects and dimensions. This is the primary reason why human-computer interaction 
(HCI) and human-centred design (HCD) activities are growing. An increasing 
number of recent studies and research in the commercial and the academic world has 
investigated these topics. It is fair to argue that the future of HCI and HCD will be 
highly focused on ‘experience’. The user’s experience can only be improved when 
applications focus on the physical, emotional, social and cultural needs of that user. 
 
One crucial question formed the background of this research study: is it 
possible to achieve an accessible exhibit’s visual information using a prototype for 
HAID as an interactive medium between visually impaired visitors and a museum 
exhibit? This question influenced the components of the research approach, the most 
appropriate methodology and methods to use and the research aims and objectives. 
However, the following questions formed the basis of inquiry and helped the main 
research question to develop. The research questions posed in this study can be 
divided into two categories. 

	  
12	  
 
Central Research Question: 
How can haptic-audio interaction design (HAID) help to enhance the museum 
experience for visually impaired people in a Hong Kong museum environment?  
 
Guiding Research Questions: 
1) What is the current status of Hong Kong museums’ facilities and services for 
supporting visually impaired visitors (in terms of the overall museum 
environment, specific galleries and exhibitions and accessibility of visual 
information)? 
2) How can a cross-modal interaction approach better support the visually 
impaired to perceive and understand visual information when constructing 
mental images of exhibits in a museum? 
3) What are the characteristics of interactivity of visually impaired people? 
4) How can these characteristics of interactivity be incorporated into designs of 
HAID platforms that are easily accessible by the visually impaired and blind? 
 
In this study, all of these research questions were related through case studies, 
field observations and pilot studies by adopting a conceptual tactile-audio paper 
prototyping approach. Each of the individual case studies had two key components: 
1) research activities and 2) an evaluation and a conclusion. 

	  
13	  
 
1.4 
FRAMEWORK AND SCOPE OF THE STUDY 
 
This thesis has four key components. First, it introduces and provides the background 
of the study. Second, it details the research approach across several chapters, 
including an introduction, a literature review, a review of the EOC of Persons with 
Disabilities in Hong Kong, a description of the methodology and methods adopted 
and a definition of the research approach. Third, it presents research activities, 
including case studies conducted to understand and investigate Hong Kong museum 
environments, characterise the visually impaired and investigate the effectiveness of 
HAID. In-depth file observation, user needs analysis and tactile prototyping and pilot 
studies were conducted to reflect the effectiveness of HAID in perceiving the visual 
information of museum exhibits.  
 
Fourth, it provides an evaluation and conclusion. The final two chapters 
(‘Critical Discussion and Analysis’ and ‘Conclusion’) critically crosscheck and align 
the four key components used repeatedly throughout the study. Figure 1 shows the 
study framework and structure, including its activities and the relationship between 
the research components and chapters. 

	  
14	  
	  
 
Figure 1: Framework and scope of study of the thesis. This structural diagram shows 
the flow of research activities and the links to chapters within the research 
components.  
 
 
This current chapter, ‘Introduction’, begins by explaining the background of the 
research study. It then sets the research aims and objectives, which reflect and align 

	  
15	  
the research questions along with the specific and general questions driving the study. 
The study framework serves to summarise this chapter and elaborates on the structure 
of the thesis in addition to the flows and relationships between the key components 
and individual chapters. 
 
 
Chapter 2, ‘Review of the Literature’, extends the current chapter by 
reviewing the work that influenced and inspired this research. It investigates, 
critically reviews and contextualises critical previous works and up-to-date 
knowledge in relation to the research topic. The chapter begins with a broad 
understanding of visual impairments and blindness, followed by a description of the 
visual perceptions of visually impaired people and the concepts of the inclusive and 
universal design approaches. Another significant aspect of this thesis is its elaboration 
on the element of touch and the importance of the haptic–tactile interaction, in 
addition to the importance of audio (sound) within the contexts of visually impaired 
people. The chapter then discusses the cross-modal interaction approach in the 
museum environment in general to build a brief understanding of museology before 
reviewing the issues related to museum accessibility for visually impaired and blind 
visitors. 
 
Once the previous research is reviewed, Chapter 3, ‘Methodology and 
Methods’, reflects the methodological considerations and approaches adopted by the 
study. After an introduction and an argument for the choice of methodologies, the 

	  
16	  
chapter dedicates a section to the most appropriate research methodology. It 
illustrates the way in which a multi-method approach was applied to every element of 
the research activities conducted within this research study. After confirming the 
empirical research approach, the chapter details the multiple case studies, user needs 
analysis and pilot studies conducted, in addition to the user-centred design principles 
that emphasise users with special needs. Finally, it considers the principles of 
universal design that may make museum environments more inclusive for the visually 
impaired. 
 
 
After the methodological approach is defined, the research activity 
components of the study are introduced and explained. Chapter 4, ‘Case Study: Hong 
Kong Museum Environments’, focuses on the main project of the research study: a 
series of case studies conducted at different stages. The first research activities 
considered in this chapter are field observations based on select museums in Hong 
Kong. This is followed by the Hong Kong Museum of Art Guided Tour for visually 
impaired people, an effective user-needs analysis activity involving a small group of 
randomly selected participants. The exercise was designed to gain first-hand 
observations of people interacting through touch and to understand the basic role of 
touch in examining objects. The exercise was also designed to study the realisation of 
tactile information as an interface of a visual exhibit.  
 

	  
17	  
Following user needs analysis, pilot studies were conducted. A case study that 
focused on user testing of different tactile printing materials was conducted, followed 
by the main pilot testing, which implemented the HAID and medium-fidelity 
conceptual tactile paper prototypes that were supported by audio descriptions to 
simulate the effect of multisensory feedback for the visually impaired participants. 
 
 
In Chapter 4, the HAID case studies and pilot testing methods are clarified, 
and the different stages of the case studies are explained. This part of the thesis 
concludes with the direct results of the case studies and participants’ feedback, 
gathered from observation and interviews. Findings of the case studies are further 
elaborated in the last part of this chapter.  
 
 
The research activities introduced in Chapter 4 include the tactile paper 
prototype and pilot studies. The paper prototype was subjected to in-depth analysis, 
and a touch-activated sound system with audio description was examined along with 
participants’ interactions with the prototype. The findings of this case study are 
presented not only to add real insights to the surface information about tactile printing 
and audio description, but also a means of analysing and further defining the research 
behaviour. 
 

	  
18	  
 
Following this component is Chapter 5, ‘Critical Discussion and Analysis’, 
which communicates the ideas and issues raised by the research activities through 
case studies and further discusses the arguments arising from the literature review 
presented in Chapter 3. At this point, the research is placed within a theoretical 
framework that questions the HAID and cross-modal approach. The chapter also 
examines the value of the interface as a tangible information tool connecting visually 
impaired people with visual information about two-dimensional untouchable museum 
exhibits according to the strategies and philosophies of other research.  
 
 
After five chapters illustrating the research process and activities and their 
connection to academia, Chapter 6, Conclusion, looks back at the finished research. 
This chapter gives an overview of the thesis by summarising and evaluating the 
results, stating which objectives have been achieved with this inquiry and answering 
and revisiting the research questions. The thesis concludes by presenting the 
limitations of the study along with possible future works and potential plans. 	  
	  
1.5 
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY 
 
This study focused on the interactivity and accessibility of visual information for the 
visually impaired to improve their process of constructing mental images of 
untouchable museum exhibits. It ultimately sought to enhance the experience of Hong 

	  
19	  
Kong museum environments via an in-depth examination and understanding of 
human interaction and interpretation of touch (haptic) and audio (sound) and how 
visual information about untouchable museum exhibits could be delivered to and 
perceived by the visually impaired through an accessible option that affects their 
museum experience. This study intended to achieve the following significance 
outcomes. 
1) The primary contribution of this study was its demonstration of the value of 
tactual and audio interpretation of visual information about museum exhibits 
through methodologically produced selected art pieces, in the form of tactile 
drawing in addition to a conceptual HAID system as an accessible medium. 
2) This study sought to enhance the current information by paying special 
attention to museum exhibits through the proposed cross-modal approach and 
HAID system. 
3) The physical interface considered was different from other currently available 
tactile museum aids in that it was neither a direct replica nor an embossed 
representation. Furthermore, it focused on elements or objects by providing 
visual descriptions that could be associated and understood by the visually 
impaired. 
4) This study addressed the missing user’s involvement or participation 
associated with rapid development in the user-centred design process. It 
considered the ways in which haptic or audio technologies are applied to 

	  
20	  
museums and reintroduced the notion of user involvement in interpreting 
visual information. Rather than technology being the main aspect, it was 
treated only as another medium. 
5) This study sought to rethink and shift the current perspective to form an 
inclusive and enhanced museum experience for the visually impaired.

	  
21	  
 
CHAPTER 2 REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
 
 
  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Overview 
This chapter focuses on reviewing and understanding the 
terminology associated with visual impairment and blindness 
and defining the functional approach that framed the research 
topic and research questions. Other work and projects relevant 
to this research are reviewed. The selected literature was 
collected from scholarly publications, conference papers, 
related journals and on-line sources. Most of the literature 
related to policy and legislation frameworks and specific 
guidelines were taken mainly from the US, UK and continent 
of Europe to attain a broader viewpoint based on best-practice 
examples. There is limited research on this topic as it relates to 
Hong Kong. 
 
The literature review in this chapter affects different parts of 
this thesis. References to the literature reviewed in this chapter 
naturally appear in other chapters when relevant. Chapter 5, 
‘Critical Discussion and Analysis’, further investigates some of 
the ideas and arguments seeded in this chapter. 

	  
22	  
2.1  
INTRODUCTION 
 
Part of this thesis is built on a growing body of literature focusing on people who are 
blind or have low vision and their museum experiences. In-depth understanding and 
review of the literature indicate that the availability of tactile objects and actions of 
museum staff have a large effect on the museum experience of blind. The literature is 
also a reminder that real barriers to the museum experience exist for the visually 
impaired and that museums have long ignored or marginalised people with 
disabilities. Earlier studies provide an important perspective and reference point for 
analysing and discussing the gathered research activities data. 
 
 
According to a survey project funded by the National Endowment for the Arts 
in the US (2011), some publications in the field of museum studies, including The 
Power of Touch: Handling Objects in Museum and Heritage Contexts and Touch in 
Museums: Policy and Practice in Object Handling published in 2007 and 2008, 
respectively, have also addressed a range of issues and strategies related to tactile 
experiences in museums. In the same report, Eriksons (1998) discussed the long and 
rich history of tactile diagrams dating back to the 18th century. The 2003 publication 
Art Beyond Sight: A Resource Guide to Art, Creativity, and Visual Impairment also 
highlighted practical information about making art experiences more accessible for 
visitors who are blind or have low vision, and the history of touch and accessibility 
dating back to the 1970s and 1980s provided useful information and insights for this 
study, particularly in terms of the development of the conceptual tactile-audio paper 

	  
23	  
prototype. 
 
 
In general, the use of haptic and audio on handheld devices has already been 
considered in several studies. Included in this chapter is an overview of previous 
studies related to interface technologies and applications used for visually impaired 
people. These studies have generally emphasised interface design, computer games, 
handheld devices and virtual environments. However, very few studies have 
considered the synchronisation of haptic and audio technology to help visually 
impaired or blind people in the museum context, particularly in Hong Kong museum 
environments. As stated earlier, based on a preliminary investigation of the 11 major 
museums in Hong Kong, it was found that the basic facilities used to assist visually 
impaired people in museums were insufficient. Very limited facilities such as 
museum tactile maps, tactile guide paths, braille descriptions for exhibits and an 
accessible website for visually impaired people were found in these museums. No 
digital handheld devices to assist the mobility of visually impaired people in the 
museums environments were noted (see Appendix 1). 
 
 
According to vom Lehn (2010), ‘museums are increasingly providing 
alternate and new resources to attract excluded audiences such as elderly people [and] 
people with physical constraints or disability, and to provide them with resources to 
access and experience the objects on display in museums’. However, relatively little 

	  
24	  
is known about how visitors use these resources to enhance their experience of 
exhibits or their overall museum visit experience. 
 
2.2  
VISUAL IMPAIRMENTS AND BLINDNESS 
 
In 1980, the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations’ public health 
arm, attempted to give the terms ‘disability’, ‘impairment’ and ‘handicap’ strict 
operational meaning within a framework designed to separate them conceptually 
while linking them theoretically. In 2001, the WHO published its new framework for 
disability and health, known as the ‘International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health’ (ICF). The WHO developed an international standard language 
and a framework, defining disability as the point where health ends. After 10 years of 
work, the 2001 framework introduced a radical departure from the old assumption 
that the term ‘disability’ applied to a distinct subset of people. The WHO’s new 
definition of disability did the following: 
• 
established parity between ‘mental’ and ‘physical’ reasons for disability;  
• 
mainstreamed the experience of disability and recognised it as a universal 
human experience; and  
• 
called for the identification of ‘facilitators’ that could not only eliminate 
barriers but also enhance experience and performance.  
 

	  
25	  
 
There are numerous formal and informal definitions of ‘visual impairment’ 
and ‘blindness’. The Hong Kong Society for the Blind (HKSB) and Hong Kong Blind 
Union (HKBU) use a subjective definition: ‘one is visually impaired if one has 
difficulties or it is impossible to read ordinary text or visually orientate oneself, or 
due to the visual impairment one has other difficulties in one’s daily life’. 
 
 
One functional definition is based on fractions, a common way of expressing 
visual acuity. The WHO defines a person as visually impaired if he or she has a visual 
acuity of less than 20/70 but equal to or better than 20/400 in the better eye with best 
possible correction. Furthermore, a person is blind if he or she has a visual acuity of 
less than 20/400 or corresponding visual field loss in the better eye with best possible 
correction. It is impossible to know the exact number of visually impaired and blind 
persons, as no central record with this information exists. 
 
 
 
According to Special Topics Report No. 48 on Persons with Disabilities and 
Chronic Diseases issued by the Government of the Hong Kong Special 
Administration Region (HKSAR) in January 2009, based on social data collected via 
the General Household Survey in 2008, there are at present 122,600 persons with 
seeing difficulty, including the totally blind. This accounts for 1.8% of the total Hong 
Kong population. There are 11,400 people suffering from total blindness, and 60% of 
them are elderly (aged 60 and above). Meanwhile, the number of mild to moderate 

	  
26	  
visually impaired amounts to 110,000. A survey conducted by South China Morning 
Post, 3 December 2010, stated that 19.7% of people with registered disabilities in 
Hong Kong suffer visual problems, the second highest population (Figure 2).	  
	  
	  
Figure 2: Visual problems rank second in terms of people with registered 
disabilities in Hong Kong (SCMP, 2010).	  
 
 
According to the HKSB and HKBU, ‘visual impairment’ or ‘blindness’ refers to a 
significant functional loss of vision that cannot be corrected by medication, surgical 
operation or ordinary optical lenses such as spectacles. The following definitions 
have been agreed upon and adopted based on the visual functioning of the persons 
involved. 

	  
27	  
 
Visual impairment can be classified into two categories: low vision and 
blindness. 
There are three levels of low vision. 
1. Severe low vision – persons with visual acuity from 6/120 to 6/1990, hand 
movement and light perception or persons with a contracted visual field in 
which the widest field diameter subtends an angular subtense <20 irrespective 
of the central visual acuity (central visual acuity refers to that of the better eye 
with correcting glasses). 
2. Moderate low vision – persons with visual acuity from 6/10 to 6/95. 
3. Mild low vision – persons with visual acuity from 16/18 to 6/48. 
4. Total blindness – persons with total absence of sight or no visual function, i.e., 
no light perception. 
Visual impairments are further classified as congenital or adventitious as follows. 
1. Congenital – refers to loss of vision present at birth. Some of the more 
common causes of congenital visual impairment are prematurity, genetic 
diseases, prenatal and perinatal infections and maternal substance abuse. 
2. Adventitious – refers to loss of vision acquired after birth as a result of illness 
or accident. 
Figure 3 presents additional categorisations and definitions based on the WHO 
standard. 
 

	  
28	  
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
Category  
Corrected VA 
 
WHO Definition 
 
 
– Better Eye  
 
Standard*  
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
0  
 
6/6-6/18 
 
 
Normal  
1  
 
<6/18-6/60  
 
 
Visual Low  
2  
 
<6/60-3/60  
 
 
Severe Visual  
3  
 
<3/60-1/60  
 
 
Blind   
4  
 
<1/60-PL  
 
 
Blind  
5 
 
 NPL   
 
 
Blind  
 
Figure 3: Categories of Visual Impairment based on WHO Standard 
* The standard WHO definition is used in medical reports and publications. It is 
solely based on visual acuity and does not take functional vision into account. 
 
 
 

	  
29	  
 
2.3  
WHAT IS A MUSEUM? 
 
The word ‘museum’ is derived from the Latin muses, meaning ‘a source of 
inspiration’ or ‘to be absorbed in one’s thoughts’. Bennett (1995) stated that museums 
collect and care for objects of scientific, artistic or historical importance and make 
them available for public viewing through exhibits of permanent collections or 
temporary exhibits. It is the role of the curator to look after the objects and explain 
their history to visitors. Furthermore, a building that is a museum can often be part of 
the collection itself. 
 
 
Established in 1946, the International Council of Museums (ICOM) has been 
dedicated to the evolutionary nature of the museum and committed to reflecting the 
realities of the museum communities globally. In 2007, ICOM updated the definition 
of a museum at the 21st General Conference in Vienna, Austria, stating that a 
museum is ‘a non-profit, permanent institution in the service of society and its 
development, open to the public, which acquires, conserves, researches, 
communicates and exhibits the tangible and intangible heritage of humanity and its 
environment for the purposes of education, study and enjoyment’. Later, Alexander 
and Alexander (2008) stated that ‘a museum is an institution that cares for a 
collection of artifacts and other objects of scientific, artistic, cultural or historical 

	  
30	  
importance and makes them available for public viewing through exhibits that may be 
permanent or temporary’. 
 
 
Dudgeon et al. (2010) mentioned that museums can be said to ‘bring the past 
to life’ and are fantastic representations of the different periods of our cultural 
history. They enable visitors to touch, feel, see, hear, experience and smell the past. 
Many museums now offer a programme of events for different groups, such as 
families and children under 5. This is in contrast to the early museums, which mainly 
catered to adult audiences. Karp et al. (2006) stated in their essay ‘Museum frictions: 
Public cultures/global transformation’ that ‘modern trends in museology have 
broadened the range of subject matter and introduced many interactive exhibits, 
which give the public the opportunity to make choices and engage in activities that 
may vary the experience from person to person’. Xu et al. (2005) stated that museums 
provided less formal and more flexible learning environments than the typical 
classrooms, where children feel more comfortable and therefore more motivated. 
Curiosity & Imagination, the national network for children’s hands-on learning, 
offers children practical, exciting and powerful hands-on activities to develop their 
identity and inspire their imagination.  
 
The Museums, Libraries and Archives Council (MLA) was launched in 2000 
as the strategic agency for museums, archives and libraries, replacing the Museums 

	  
31	  
and Galleries Commission and the Library and Information Commission. Their policy 
for the museum sector asks curators and programme-makers to provide more 
educational and inclusive content. By providing an ‘Access for All’ self-assessment 
toolkit to museums, the MLA also makes the accessibility and diversion policies 
accessible to these institutions (MLA, 2007).  
 
 
According to Terras (2007), the Cultural Heritage Applications unit of the 
European Commission launched a study called ‘Digital Heritage and Cultural 
Content’ (DigiCULT) at the end of 2001. With an overall aim of making digital 
resources for the cultural heritage sector more accessible to a wider audience through 
the use of information and communication technologies (ICT), the study provided 
European museums, archives and libraries with guidance on the challenges they 
would face between 2002 and 2006. Based on the outcomes of the study, a 
recommended process was proposed: the ‘unlocking the value of cultural heritage’ 
process seen in Figure 4. 
 

	  
32	  
 
 
Figure 4 – ‘Unlocking the value of cultural heritage’, with illustrative four-layer 
model. 
 
 
 
According to Welsh (2005), the function of the museum has long been 
discussed, and completely different views have arisen from these discussions. In the 
most basic form of description, museums are institutions that preserve ‘precious 
things and ideas’. Although the role of museums in society is constantly changing, 

	  
33	  
museums are still collecting and conserving valuable objects from different periods of 
history. When the 1995 Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) entered into legislation, 
providing not only physical but also intellectual access to content in museums 
became a legal requirement in the UK. Museums around the world are now 
developing new ways to enhance their educational facilities, improve access and 
appeal to wider audiences. The British Museum, for example, organises a wide range 
of events for deaf and blind visitors, holds signed gallery talks and handling sessions 
and presents braille labels and plaster cast reliefs of Parthenon sculptures that can be 
touched (British Museum, 2004).  
 
 
As stated in the previous section, most blind people rely on touch to gather 
graphical and spatial information about objects (Heller, 2003: 161). Until the late 
1990s, there were few written works available about accessibility in museums 
(Rayner, 1998). Today, there are plenty of resources for researchers to study and 
understand the development of accessibility in museums. For instance, Rayner’s 
(1998) Access in Mind looked at some early learning-related activities made for or 
with disabled audiences in mind. Access in Mind was a report put together for the 
Intellectual Access Trust in Scotland and published in book format with the intention 
of guiding museums and museum researchers to broaden their understanding of 
inclusive heritage and cultural institutions. This report was the result of interviews 
and observations that took place largely in Scottish museums. The report examined 

	  
34	  
the improvements in physical accessibility that took place in museums after the 1995 
DDA and argued for the need to pay more attention to intellectual access and include 
visitors with learning disabilities. This criticism was taken into account when the 
tactual explorations project of the current study was organised to make it available to 
everyone who wished to take part.  
 
 
Kusayama (2005) stated that individuals with sensory disabilities are offered 
less-advanced amenities than people with mobility disabilities in museums, although 
the multisensory approaches have become common ‘services’ in some of these 
institutions. Visually impaired museumgoers demand better and wider access to 
museum collections, and the government legislation now recognises this need 
officially (Candlin, 2004). It is even more necessary than ever for researchers to work 
towards better, inclusive and more meaningful access to the museum exhibits for such 
visitors.  
 
 
In addition to general access debate within the museums, the ‘tactile museum’ 
is becoming more widely available as not only part of a conventional museum but 
also an establishment on its own. Although these museums are conceptually and 
practically very different from what this thesis proposes, for the sake of 
understanding the development of access and the universal design principle in 
museums, it is necessary to look at these important establishments. For example, 

	  
35	  
founded in 1984 by the Lighthouse for the Blind of Greece, the Tactual Museum in 
Kallithea enables visitors to examine replicas of ancient Greek works such as Venus 
de Milo, one of the most important examples of Hellenistic art, the original of which 
is still held in the Louvre in Paris (Becatoros, 2004). Another tactile museum 
designed specifically for a blind or visually impaired audience is the Museo 
Tiflológico in Madrid, Spain. In its collection, there are reproductions of art-historical 
monuments, art created by artists with visual impairments and a historical navigation 
of the development of devices for blind people (Axel & Levent, 2003).  
 
 
One other very important institution of tactile interaction is the Perkins 
Museum in Boston, Massachusetts, US. The Perkins Museum illustrates the history of 
educating blind or deafblind students of a variety of disciplines, including reading  
and writing, geography, math, science, music and sports. The museum displays the 
school’s history through original correspondence, photographs and tactile images in 
addition to the oldest and largest tactile globe in the US (Perkins Museum, 2011).  
 
Main museums usually offer ‘touch tours’, ‘tactile images’, ‘tactile diagrams’, 
‘braille prints’ and ‘handling sessions’ as part of their programmes (Axel & Levent, 
2003). Birmingham Museum of Art in Alabama, US; the Finnish National Gallery in 
Helsinki, Finland; the Jewish Museum in New York City, US; the Museum of Fine 
Arts in Boston and the National Gallery in London, UK are some of the museums that 

	  
36	  
include touch tours, tactile replicas and audio descriptions to enable better access for 
their visitors. 
 
2.3.1 A Brief History of Museums in Hong Kong 
The first government-run museum, the City Museum and Art Gallery in the Hong 
Kong City Hall, was established in 1962. Hong Kong is considered to have started 
late in museum building compared with other international metropolitan cities such as 
New York, London, Paris and Tokyo in terms of number and scale of museums. A 
report presented by M+ Legislative Council Subcommittee on West Kowloon 
Cultural District stated that according to information provided by ‘Museums of the 
World’ in 2002, there are 107 museums in New York, 203 in London, 211 in Paris, 
52 in Los Angeles and 121 in Tokyo. Based on up-to-date records, there are still 
fewer than 40 museums in Hong Kong.  
 
Miss Christina Chu, the former chief curator of the Hong Kong Museum of 
Art during 2000–2006, provided a good observation of the rise of the Hong Kong 
Museum of Art in her article ‘Scattered memories’. Chu (2008) stated that the old 
City Hall inaugurated in 1869 by public contributions started as an important 
landmark situated in the central district; it was a complex that integrated a public 
museum, a library, a theatre and conference rooms. In 1933, a survey was conducted 
to evaluate the City Hall; the outcomes were described as ‘primitive and poor’ in the 

	  
37	  
same article. In her article ‘A museum of hybridity: The history of the display of art in 
the Public Museum of Hong Kong, and its implications for cultural identities’ (2011), 
Eva Man commented on ‘the low-water mark in museum provision throughout the 
whole of the British Empire excepting only the smaller islands of the Pacific and 
some of the more backward African territories’.  
 
Apart from Chu (2008) and Man (2011), a report prepared by a committee and 
presented to the government in 1938 described the museum as ‘a repository for odds 
and ends from every corner of the globe . . . a collection of Australian parrots, 
mineralogical specimens from Wales, old clocks, etc.’. However, a report by the 
Architectural Department in Hong Kong (2010) stated the following: 
 
. . . the second generation of City Hall became Hong Kong’s most 
prominent and probably the earliest centre for cultural activities, and the 
hotbed of Hong Kong’s art and cultural development. The Hong Kong Arts 
Festival, the Asian Arts Festival, the International Film Festival, and the 
International Arts Carnival, to name a few, all started in this new City Hall. 
In the twenty plus years to follow, the City Hall was the key player in 
nurturing and promoting local cultural and artistic talents, providing local 
audiences with opportunities to appreciate local and foreign art, and 
invigorating the Hong Kong art and culture scene. (Figure 5) 
 
The old City Hall was demolished in 1947 and rebuilt in 1962. Records show 
that the forerunner of the Hong Kong Museum of Art, the City Museum and Art 

	  
38	  
Gallery, was placed on the top three floors of the High Block of the new City Hall, 
with a gross total area of 15,000 square feet. Three years after its establishment, these 
facilities at the new City Hall were deemed inadequate as stated (Man, 2011). 
However, no other building served as a public cultural venue in Hong Kong between 
1947 and 1962. 
 
Figure 5: New Hong Kong City Hall, with the Low Block facing the Queen’s Pier and 
the Memorial Garden and High Block to the right. The old Bank of China and HSBC 
buildings are in the background. 
 
Man (2011) further revealed reports that the Museum and Art Gallery Select 
Committee asked for the construction of a new 90,000-square-foot museum. 
However, the proposal, together with several more proposals made between 1965 and 

	  
39	  
1972, was ultimately rejected as stated. In 1974, the Urban Council approved the 
division of the City Museum and Art Gallery into the Museum of History and Hong 
Kong Museum of Art, and decided to relocate the Museum of Art to the Cultural 
Centre site in Tsim Sha-Tsui, a major tourist area. A year later, it was decided that the 
City Museum and Art Gallery would be renamed the Hong Kong Museum of Art; the 
historical and archaeological collections were moved, and the former museum and 
gallery functioned until 1991, when the brand new Museum of Art was launched. The 
new museum was conceived of as a cosmopolitan space, one that would dedicate 
itself to Western and Eastern art as stated in Man’s article. According to the front 
page of the museum documentation, ‘It is the mission of the Hong Kong Museum of 
Art to preserve the cultural heritage of China and promote art with a local focus . . . 
To maintain an essential international character, the museum also presents a great 
variety of thematic exhibitions drawn from local and overseas sources’ (Man, 2011). 
  
Mr Tang Hoi Chiu, who served as chief curator at the Hong Kong Museum of 
Art between 2006 and 2012, mentioned the following: 
. . . the collection strategy of the City Museum and Art Gallery 
established in 1962 was to make the museum focus on Hong Kong, tracing its 
roots in Guangdong Province and southern China, and reaching out to the 
Chinese diasporas at large. To make up for the discrepancy of Western art, 
exhibitions or exchange programs relating to Western and Asian culture and 

	  
40	  
art are to provide citizens with opportunities to understand and appreciate 
arts of the world (Tang, 2008). 
 
2.3.2  Museums and Visually Impaired People 
Nelson Coon’s (1953) publication The Place of the Museum in the Education of the 
Blind stated that the beginning of the museum movement for the blind could be 
credited to Johann Wilhelm Klein. In Vienna, from 1804 to 1809, Klein first used and 
prepared a collection of touchable teaching models for blind individuals. The 
museum that Klein founded developed into a collection of almost ‘5,000 specimens 
devoted to all phases of the education and history of the blind’. However, the 
museum was destroyed during World War II. According to Reidmiller (2003), the 
museum movement for the blind went beyond Vienna. A 40-page catalogue that 
could be traced back to the late 1890s and included all of the objects available for 
educational purposes for the blind was found, its creation attributed to a museum in 
Steglitz, Germany. Schools for the blind in Germany, Austria, France and England 
also recognised the importance of tactual experiences and prepared to meet the 
demand. By 1931 there were 39 museums in Great Britain with special collections for 
individuals who were blind (Reidmiller, 2003). 
 
From 1949 to 1951, the London Science Museum provided exhibits in a 
separate gallery for ‘hand-viewing’ only (Coon, 1953). According to Coon (1953), in 
a large and airy room near the museum entrance, the exhibits were arranged on tables 

	  
41	  
at a convenient height, a little below waist level. Just inside the door was a ‘touch-
plan’ of the exhibition. A small steel block represented each table with the subject 
printed beneath it in braille. Notes in braille were also placed to the left of each 
exhibit. 
 
 
 
According to Coon (1953), around the 1850s, the Director of Perkins Institute 
for the Blind, Dr Michael Anagnos, was the first to attempt to provide a museum 
collection for the blind in the US. The collection was housed at the institute and 
began with an assortment of anatomical models Anagnos brought with him from 
Germany. By 1881, the collection had grown to more than 1,261 items, mostly related 
to the field of natural history. 
 
 
In 1909, the American Museum of Natural History instituted a series of 
lectures for blind people (Coon, 1953). A year later, through a generous gift, a 
permanent exhibit was arranged and more lectures were given. Other museums 
followed suit and began to supply services for the blind. Coon reported that from time 
to time in Boston ‘cooperative experiments enabled students from the Perkins 
Institute to be introduced to the fine arts’. During 1932–1933, both the Fogg Museum 
of Art and Boston Museum of Fine Arts cooperated in an experiment, ‘making 
history lives through handling art objects with historical and artistic merit’. 

	  
42	  
According to Rodriguez (1984), ‘This act affects institutions and programs that 
receive federal funds, which would certainly include museums’. 
 
 
The first permanent touch tours in a British museum were those designed by 
Ann Pearson for the Egyptian and Graeco-Roman sculpture galleries in the British 
Museum. These were introduced in 1990 and consisted of a number of braille/large-
print signs attached to certain sculptures in each of the galleries that indicated visually 
impaired people could touch these particular pieces. Accompanying audio and large 
print guides were also made available upon request from the main desk 
(Hetherington, 2003). Hetherington (2003) commented that by 2003, most museums 
provided an accessible toilet, put in place a couple of wheelchair ramps and in rare 
instances displayed signs printed in a large font. However, it is still rare for anything 
more than this to be provided as a matter of course, except as the outcome of a lottery 
funding initiative in which an access audit is mandatory. 
 
 
A new paradigm studied by Heath and vom Lehn (2004, 2006 and 2007) 
indicates that as people explore museums they examine exhibits in interaction with 
each other. According to their studies, museumgoers ‘make sense of the pieces in and 
through talk and interaction’ (vom Lehn, 2010; see also Piscitelli & Weier, 2002; 
Silverman, 2010). vom Lehn (2010) commented as follows: 

	  
43	  
. . . within visitor studies, a largely applied field of research, there is a 
large body of studies concerned with the impact of talk on people’s experience 
and learning from works of art. Yet, few of these studies explore how 
particular aspects and characteristics of exhibits are rendered noticeable and 
worthwhile examining in interaction with others. These studies, like most 
research on social interaction, presuppose that the participants have average 
vision. They assume the participants involved in the situations at the exhibits 
can see and experience the works in the same way, have equal access to each 
other’s visible actions, and thus, based on their visual faculties, are able to 
create shared experiences of the exhibits. 
 
Hetherington’s (2003) ‘Accountability and disposal: visual impairment and 
the museum’ paid explicit attention to material mediation in visitor practice. The 
article focused on how a visually impaired woman encountered two galleries in the 
British Museum and the various mediations that occurred, both through the sense of 
touch. The woman, Sara, described the tactile sensation of a selection of sculptures, 
which visually impaired visitors were allowed to touch, and as mediated by a number 
of material aids, such as a tactile book called ‘Second Sight of the Parthenon Frieze’, 
which had the job of making the Parthenon Frieze accessible to the visually impaired 
visitor. Hetherington (2003) mentioned a range of objects, braille signs, easy access 
ramps, stairs, toilets, audio guides and the tactile book and showed how museum 

	  
44	  
practices of access and the mediating objects constituted the impaired person and her 
embodiment. Hetherington’s (2003) work was oriented towards discourse, materiality 
and the body, and his approach to materiality was referenced by Callon, Law and 
Latour (1984). 
 
 
2.4  
VISUAL PERCEPTION 
 
According to Michael (1983), Barraga (1986) and Wilson (1987), visual perception 
involves ‘examining an object, distinguishing the essential features, understanding the 
relationships between the elements and integrating the information into a meaningful 
whole’. At the same time, these authors recognised visual perception from the 
perspective of sighted observers, who usually approach things based on their 
appearance. Sighted people have the ability to see the whole and often neglect the 
details until further examination. In the essay ‘Berthold Lowenfeld on blindness and 
blind people’, Lowenfeld (1981) stated that ‘the visual learners as individuals who 
use their touch senses and kinesthetic experiences only rarely and rely almost 
completely on what they can perceive visually with whatever little eyesight they have 
left’.  
 

	  
45	  
According to Barraga (1973), when the visual sense is functioning with a high 
degree of efficiency, individuals are able to use their sense of sight to understand their 
environment. Cornelius and Casler (1991) stated that ‘visually minded individuals 
acquaint themselves with their environment primarily through their eyes and take on 
the role of spectator’. Nevertheless, in a much earlier essay entitled ‘Creative and 
Mental Growth’, Viktor Lowenfeld (1957) stated that ‘the very visually minded 
individual would be disturbed and inhibited if he were to be limited to haptic 
impressions’.  
 
 
James J. Gibson and Richard Gregory also investigated issues related to visual 
perception and the blind. Gibson’s The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems 
(1966) emphasised the importance of touch theory in the development of materials 
for blind people. Gibson (1972, 1988) called perception a ‘bottom-up process’, 
inferring that sensory information is analysed in one direction: from simple analysis 
of raw sensory data to ever-increasing complex analysis through the visual system. In 
his essay ‘A theory of direct visual perception’, Gibson stated that he attempted to 
give pilots training in depth perception during the Second World War, and that this 
work led him to the view that humans’ perception of surfaces was more important 
than their depth/space perception. Surfaces contain features sufficient to distinguish 
different objects from each other. In addition, perception involves identifying the 

	  
46	  
function of the object, i.e., whether it can be thrown or grasped, whether it can be sat 
on and so on. 
 
 
Gregory (1970) argued that perception is a constructive process that relies on 
past experiences and stored information. Prior knowledge and past experience, he 
argued, are crucial in perception: ‘when he/she looks at something, a perceptual 
hypothesis will be developed, which is based on prior knowledge. The developed 
hypotheses are nearly always correct. However, on rare occasions, perceptual 
hypotheses can be disconfirmed by perceived data’. 
 
 
However, Lederman (1982) stated that visual perception is tightly associated 
with textural perception theory. In her publication Tactual Perception: A Sourcebook, 
she defined textural perception as ‘experiencing any number of surface qualities, for 
example roughness, smoothness, hardness, stickiness, slipperiness, oiliness, 
coarseness, and graininess’. Furthermore, Lederman looked to Katz (1925), who was 
a major figure in the study of the psychology of perception, to establish a connection 
between surface texture, or as he termed it ‘modifications’, and its perception through 
vibration and motion. 
 
 
Katz (1925) argued strongly that vibrations were necessary to visual 
perception. He observed that when the finger was stationary on a surface, there was 

	  
47	  
no vibration, which in turn meant there was no perception of the qualities of the 
surface. He believed that lateral motion was required to perceive roughness and 
smoothness, and that vertical motion was required to perceive hardness and softness. 
He also considered the contribution of another kind of information: the thermal 
properties of both skin and surface and their role in perceiving textures. His subjects 
used heat conductance to identify different materials, such as wood and metal (cited 
in Schiff & Foulke, 1982). He also examined the effects of hand speed and force on 
the perception of surface texture. Katz found that perceived roughness increased with 
increasing force (Lederman, 1982). 
 
 
The findings of Aleman et al. (2001) showed that congenitally totally blind 
individuals did not perform better than sighted people on tasks aimed at measuring 
‘visuospatial’ and pictorial imagery. However, their essay also stated the following: 
. . . the blind participants were well able to perform the visual imagery 
tasks, which may imply that the representations involved in this type of 
information processing that go beyond the limitations imposed by the 
properties of single sensory channels and integrate information from different 
sensory modalities. Thus, visual imagery may be purely visual only to a small 
extent. 
 

	  
48	  
 
Bertolo (2005) investigated visual imagery in blind subjects from a scientific 
approach and proved it was possible to have visual imagery perception without visual 
experience from the past. He presented the results based on the work of a group using 
visual activation in dreams. The results were related to spectral components, showing 
that the congenitally blind had visual content in their dreams and were able to draw 
them. Furthermore, their Visual Activation Index was negatively correlated with 
spectral component power, meaning it was possible for visually impaired and blind 
people to have visual perception, even when they had no previous visual experience. 
 
 
Visually impaired and blind people have a different visual perception of the 
world than sighted people. There are also relevant differences between perceptions of 
the completely blind and those with a certain level of visual impairment. Any system 
designed for the visually impaired must be aware of these differences to provide a 
user interface that can adapt to the limitations and special needs of its users, 
particularly in terms of the ‘touch’ and ‘sound’ perception and interaction aspects, 
which are discussed in more detail later. 
 
2.5 
 ACCESSIBILITY 
 
The terms ‘accessible’ and ‘accessibility’ are descriptors for both tangible and non-
tangible products such as devices, environments, services and systems. These 

	  
49	  
products are generally designed for people with special needs, single or multiple 
disabilities or partial impairments. An important accessibility principle relates to 
giving users access regardless of their physical conditions (Ghiani et al., 2008). This 
section further elaborates that a cross-modal interaction system can be an effective 
approach to supporting various interaction modalities, including auditory, haptic, 
way-finding (positioning and tracking) and multiple touchscreens for real-time input 
or speech feedback. Thus, by applying a cross-modal interaction approach, it is 
possible to provide an assistive interface for users with different physical abilities or 
constraints. The College of North Atlantic (2011) stated that ‘another dimension of 
accessibility is the ability to access information and services by minimizing the 
barriers of distance and cost as well as the accessibility and usability of the interface’. 
Salgafo and Salmi (2005) stated that a well-considered interactive system with 
integrated modalities could help users with a wide variety of physical impairments. 
For example, visually impaired people often rely on the audio modality with simple 
input via keypad or touchscreen. Hearing-impaired people rely on the visual modality 
with some voice input. 
 
 
Furthermore, the terms ‘accessible’ and ‘accessibility’ are most prominently 
used when discussing physical environments and buildings. Terms such as ‘access all 
areas’, ‘accessible products’ and ‘disabled access’ feature most strongly in such 
physical environments (Roulstone, 2010). Roulstone (2010) further explained that in 

	  
50	  
this sense, most academic, policy and practice attention has been attached to 
environmental access. It is important to remember the point made earlier: physical 
access is pointless unless the educational, cultural, civic and employment domains are 
also accessible in the broadest sense. In 1988, Marta Russell published an article that 
stated the following: 
… a key policy challenge across the developed world is the assumption 
that technically accessible environments which are ‘standards compliant’ can 
run themselves, especially in an era of budgetary restraints. For example 
many newly constructed metro/subway stations are unstaffed, which for 
disabled people using them for the first time may prove difficult. So in its 
fullest sense, access is a much broader social inclusion and socio-economic 
issue that goes ‘beyond ramps’ and takes account of the important 
‘activation’ of well-designed social spaces with enabling human agency. 
 
 
 
In a recent essay, vom Lehn (2010) mentioned that over the previous decade 
there had been a large increase in museum funding used to refurbish and renew 
existing exhibitions and create new ones. This increase in funding was accompanied 
by growths in visitor numbers and recognition of museums’ contributions to 
education and social inclusion (cf. Anderson, 1999; Hooper- Greenhill, 1991; Dodd 
& Sandell, 1998). The growth in funding for museums and the increasing importance 
of museums as educational institutions has encouraged studies to consider the 

	  
51	  
‘museum experience’ (Falk & Dierking, 2000). However, these studies have often 
been influenced by developments in the behavioural and cognitive sciences, where 
there is a long-standing interest in art perception (Goguen, 1999; Solso, 2004).  
 
 
As people explore museums, they examine exhibits in interaction with each 
other. They make sense of the pieces through talk and interaction. Within visitor 
studies, a largely applied field of research, a large body of studies has focused on the 
effect of talk on people’s experience and what they learn from works of art (Piscitelli 
& Weier, 2002; Silverman, 2010). Yet, few of these studies have explored how 
particular aspects and characteristics of exhibits are rendered noticeable and 
worthwhile when examined in interaction with each other. Drawing on a corpus of 
video recordings gathered from a range of museums and galleries, Heath and vom 
Lehn (Heath & vom Lehn, 2004; vom Lehn, 2006a and 2007) explored, for example, 
how people configure the ways in which they look at, see and experience exhibits in 
and through social interaction. These studies, like most research on social interaction, 
presupposed that their participants had average vision. They assumed the participants 
involved in the situations at the exhibits could see and experience the works in the 
same way, had equal access to each other’s visible actions and thus, based on their 
visual faculties, were able to create shared experiences of the exhibits.  
 

	  
52	  
 
Perhaps surprisingly, research in the social sciences related to art perception 
and museum audiences has not addressed this lack of interest in the situation in which 
aesthetic experiences arise. For example, although they powerfully demonstrated the 
influences of social structure and education on people’s understanding and concept of 
art, Bourdieu’s (1990 and 1991) famous works implied an individual’s cognitive 
ability to make sense of artworks. Furthermore, this preoccupation with the individual 
in studies of art perception is surprising because original artworks are predominantly 
encountered in museums where people go as a family and with friends (MORI, 2001; 
Wright, 1989). The encounter with works of art in museums often occurs in social 
situations (vom Lehn, Heath & Hindmarsh, 2001). 
 
 
From the social interaction viewpoint, as vom Lehn (2010) emphasised, 
relatively little research has investigated how people with differential access to the 
visible world create a shared experience of the material and visible worlds and how 
they constitute objects in and through interaction. Quite recently, a few (visually 
impaired) sociologists (Michalko, 2001; Saerberg, 1990 and 2006) have addressed 
this lack of research. Their studies have primarily served as autobiographical 
accounts of living with blindness. They have discussed everyday activities and 
experiences with social situations from the perspective of a blind person (Michalko, 
2001). They have provided accounts of social interaction as experienced by visually 
impaired participants. They have particularly focused on the ways in which visually 

	  
53	  
impaired people navigate public spaces such as pavement and the problems they face 
when crossing streets, including navigation with a dog, a cane and a human 
companion (Michalko, 2001). Despite the important contribution of these studies to 
an understanding of visually impaired peoples’ experience of social situations, 
relatively little remains known about the organisation of talk and interaction between 
sighted and visually impaired people. 
 
 
Research on vision and communication has provided some insights into the 
difficulties that may arise in interactions involving visually impaired participants. 
Some studies have suggested that bodily and visual action provides participants with 
important information about each other’s state of participation in a situation (Argyle, 
Lalljee & Cook, 1968). Unfortunately, few studies have drawn on these arguments, 
and when they have done so they have primarily been interested in trouble occurring 
in talk between visually impaired and sighted participants (Coates, 2003), rather than 
in the practical organisation of interactions through which sighted and visually 
impaired participants concertedly make sense of the material and visual worlds they 
inhabit. 
 
 
In the literature, accessibility is principally conceived of as a social policy 
approach designed to widen access to society’s resources and to encourage and 
enable all parts of the population to participate in society, science, education, art and 

	  
54	  
culture (Hooper-Greenhill et al., 2000; Sandell, 1998; Social Exclusion Unit, 2003). 
These policies have supported initiatives to facilitate participation in the arts; for 
example, they have encouraged the widespread deployment of ramps and lifts to 
facilitate physical access for wheelchair users and of audio loops and subtitles for the 
deaf in cinemas and theatres (Arts Council of England, 2008). 
 
 
Visitors who have disabilities can face additional challenges beyond those just 
described. They too are looking for that familiar link that can help them realise the 
relevance of what they are learning in a museum. Visitors with vision impairments 
are trying to synthesise partial impressions to create the whole (Wexler, 2009). This 
can make it difficult to understand things like distance and size. Using multiple 
senses can help a variety of visitors learn in a museum. Bodily sensations such as 
touch are the key to motivation because they enable the student to remember the 
sensory experience and help them to remember what they have learned about the 
artwork (Wexler, 2009). 
 
 
Well-designed access can be built into the design of a museum at little 
additional cost to eliminate the stigma of special services and thus allow all visitors to 
feel welcome regardless of their disabilities. These accommodations can be integrated 
into the design so that they remain aesthetically pleasing and practical (Salmen, 
1998). The phrase ‘design for all’ means that the devices used in the exhibition can be 

	  
55	  
accessed by all users, independent of their sensory abilities or technological 
competencies (Ruiz, Pajares, Utray & Moreno, 2011). These kinds of adaptations 
should allow all visitors to move around the space together, meaning that all exhibits 
must be accessible to everyone. It is not enough to simply offer an alternative 
programme. Visitors with vision impairments should have a choice between regular 
and specialised programming. A museum is not allowed by law to exclude a person 
from a particular activity based on his or her disabilities (Salmen, 1998). There are, of 
course, extreme exceptions to this rule. When an adaptation may cause a direct threat 
of harm or change the very nature of the exhibit, an alternative experience may not be 
possible. However, the adaptation cannot be denied simply because it is limited by 
liability insurance. Compliance with the law is an on-going process that needs 
constant updating as both the available technology and the needs of the public change 
and evolve. If the museum is located in a historic building, there may be some 
additional exceptions. There must be a compromise between accessibility and 
maintaining the historical significance of the building.  
 
 
According to Salmen (1998), there are nine building blocks to creating an 
accessible museum. 
1. There must be a commitment to accessibility in the general mission statement 
of the institution.  

	  
56	  
2. A coordinator of accessibility should be designated. (This could be more than 
one person if it is a large museum.) 
3. The institution should obtain information from people with disabilities.  
4. Staff and volunteers should be trained on accessibility.  
5. The museum should periodically conduct reviews of its facilities and 
programmes.  
6. Short and long-term accessibility goals such as barrier removal, effective 
communication and new construction should be implemented.  
7. Accessible programmes should be promoted, and people should be told which 
programmes are accessible and to whom they are accessible.  
8. There should be some kind of grievance policy so that the museum is able to 
receive feedback and see what still needs to be done.  
9. An on-going review of accessibility efforts should be conducted to make sure 
the museum is adequately and effectively meeting the needs of its visitors. 
 
 
In addition, Coroama, Kapic and Rothenbacher (2004) conducted in-depth 
interviews with visually impaired and blind people and derived a list of requirements 
for an assistance pervasive computing system to improve their accessibility in 
familiar environments. The following list of findings is helpful for this study. 

	  
57	  
1. The system must increase the user’s perception of his or her surroundings by 
telling the user which entities he or she is passing by. This seems to be the 
most important user requirement; it provides an extension of the user’s world. 
2. The system must not require the user to pinpoint a certain location to obtain 
the desired information. (This is especially difficult for completely blind 
people.) 
3. The system should announce points of interest located farther away. 
4. The system should help the user to navigate to these points of interest, 
whether outdoor or indoors. 
5. The system should let the user filter objects according to classifications and 
present a list of entities situated in the surrounding environment, so that he or 
she may subsequently choose to be guided to either the nearest instance or 
another one on the list. 
6. The system should enable communities to emerge by allowing the user to 
leave marks or remainders for the current user and/or other users (e.g., a 
message on a traffic light reading ‘large crossroad ahead, must be passed 
quickly’). 
	  

	  
58	  
 
2.5.1 Accessibility of Visual Information 
The findings of Aleman et al. (2001) showed that congenitally totally blind 
individuals did not perform better than sighted people on tasks aimed at measuring 
‘visuospatial’ and pictorial imagery. However, the authors also stated the following: 
. . . the blind participants were well able to perform the visual imagery 
tasks, which may imply that the representations involved in this type of 
information processing go beyond the limitations imposed by the properties of 
single sensory channels and integrate information from different sensory 
modalities. Thus, visual imagery may be purely visual only to a small extent. 
 
Bertolo (2005) investigated visual imagery in blind subjects from a scientific 
approach and proved it was possible to have visual imagery perceptions without 
visual experience from the past. He presented the results based on the work of a 
group using visual activation in dreams and found they had a spectral component. 
Congenitally blind participants had visual content in their dreams and were able to 
draw them; furthermore, their Visual Activation Index was negatively correlated with 
spectral component power. In short, it is possible for visually impaired and blind 
people to have visual perception, even when they have no previous visual experience. 
 
 
 
Visually impaired and blind people have a different visual perception of the 
world than sighted people. There are also relevant differences between the 

	  
59	  
perceptions of the completely blind and of individuals with a certain level of visual 
impairment. Any system designed for the visually impaired must be aware of these 
differences to provide a user interface that adapts to the limitations and special needs 
of its users, particularly in terms of the ‘touch’ and ‘sound’ perception and interaction 
aspects, which are discussed in more detail later. 
 
2.5.2 Visualisation and Mental Visual Imagery 
To a certain extent, individuals who are sighted or non-sighted have the ability to 
build imagery in their minds without the aid of external inputs. These mental images 
are important because the mental operations involved in reasoning with visualisations 
very often involve combinations of mental and external imagery.  
 
 
Artidi et al. (1987) revealed that congenitally blind people have imagery that 
is indeed different from that of sighted people. Some aspects of visual imagery are 
visual and not present in blind people’s images; for example, angular size diminishes 
with viewing distance and perspective. However, a study outcome presented by 
Kenny (1982) stated the opposite, i.e., that blind people could use perspective in 
drawings. Kerr (1983) stated that some aspects of mental imagery construction could 
be evoked by multiple modalities and may be present even in the congenitally blind.  
 

	  
60	  
 
Mental images are transitory; they are maintained only by cognitive effort and 
rapidly fade without it (Kosslyn, 1990). The following are key properties of mental 
images. 
1. Only relatively simple images can be held in mind, at least for most people. 
Kosslyn (1990) had subjects add more and more imaginary bricks to a mental 
image and found that people were able to imagine four to eight bricks at most. 
However, because the bricks were all identical, it is almost certain the limit he 
found was smaller for more complex objects, e.g., a red triangle, a green 
square or a blue circle. 
2. People are able to form mental images of aggregations, such as a pile of 
bricks. This partially gets around the problem of the small number of items 
that can be imagined. 
3. Operations can be performed on mental images. Individual parts can be 
translated, scaled or rotated and added, deleted or otherwise altered (Shepard 
& Cooper, 1982). People sometimes use visual imagery when asked to 
perform logical problems (Johnson-Laird, 1983). For example, a person given 
the statement ‘some swans are black’ may construct a mental image 
containing an aggregation of white dots (as a chunk) with a mental image of 
one or two black dots.  
 

	  
61	  
 
2.6  
HAPTIC INTERACTION (TOUCH) 
Touch 
1: to bring a bodily part into contact with especially so as to  
perceive through the tactile sense: handle or feel gently usually with 
 
the intent to understand or appreciate 
2: to strike or push lightly especially with the hand or foot or an implement 
3: to lay hands upon with intent to heal 
4 archaic a: to play on (a stringed instrument) b: to perform (a melody) by  
playing or singing 
5 a: to take into the hands or mouth b: to put hands upon in any way or 
degree; especially: to commit violence upon 
6: to deal with: become involved with 
7: to induce to give or lend 
8: to cause to be briefly in contact or conjunction with something 
9 a (1): to meet without overlapping or penetrating: adjoin  
(2): to get to: reach b: to be tangent to c: to rival in quality or value 
10: to speak or tell of especially in passing 
11 a: to relate to: concern b: to have an influence on: affect 
(Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary) 
 
 
This thesis is focused on the haptic aspect, and this section focuses on the importance 
of touch. The main aims here are to look at touch as both a concept and an important 
human sense and to visit its changeable place in history. 
	  

	  
62	  
 
Based on McLinden and McCall’s (2002) Learning Through Touch, touch is a 
complicated and multifaceted sense. Skin has the ability to read texture, wetness, 
shape, elasticity, weight, density, pressure, vibrations and temperature. Related to 
touch, the body’s ‘proprioceptive’ system can sense where things are without seeing 
them, making it possible to pass popcorn in a dark theatre or to pass a note behind 
one’s back. Although the eyes cannot see these objects, the body knows exactly 
where they are. The authors further elaborated that touch provides important 
information-seeking abilities. The active use of touch to seek out information has 
been deemed ‘haptic touch’, relating to the bias for how things feel rather than the 
way they look. However, touch is not always an active search for information; it can 
also passively acquire information incidentally. Consider the warmth the whole body 
feels when sitting by a fire, or the vibrations that pulse through the body during a 
particularly violent bout of thunder. Furthermore, touch provides a role in daily 
interactions between people as they hug, kiss or shake hands. 
 
 
McLinden and McCall (2002) quoted Geza Revesz, a scholar who drew 
comparisons between touch and visual perception, as saying that ‘the eye takes in the 
“form” of an object as an immediate impression, through spatial examination, 
whereas the hand is predominately concerned with the ‘structure’ of an object, 
through serial or linear examination’. In contrast to vision, gathering information 
about an object through haptic touch is a slow, analytical and intimate process. 

	  
63	  
Revesz argued that active touch is superior to passive touch, which gives only a 
limited understanding of an object. Passive touch can bring an object to attention, but 
to fully understand it, one much actively touch it. 
 
 
In addition, according to much earlier publications such as that by Lisenco 
(1971), ‘haptic’ is defined as those sensations received through touch. Lowenfeld and 
Brittain (1975) indicated that the term ‘haptic’ came from the Greek word ‘haptos’, 
meaning ‘laying hold of’. In the article ‘Observation on active touch’, Gibson (1966) 
called haptic interaction ‘the sensibility of an individual to the world adjacent to his 
body by the use of his body’. Matlin (1983) stated that ‘the perception of objects by 
touching them is called haptic perception’. Dr Natalie Barraga (1973), a professional 
in the vision field, stated that information could be conveyed to the human’s brain 
through the sense of touch. Sense of touch is defined as a situation in which ‘the skin 
must be in contact with the stimuli or movement must occur in the body’. In his 
publication The World of Touch, Katz (1925) noted that this contact allowed an 
individual to detect the properties of that object. 
 
 
According to Berthold Lowenfeld (1981), ‘haptic minded individuals observe 
everything tactually and kinesthetically, and will use their sight only when touch 
cannot be used’. Viktor Lowenfeld (1957) discovered that haptic users, even those 
with limited vision proficiency, would act as if blind, relying on their sense of touch 

	  
64	  
to create; if a haptically minded person ‘acquaints himself with an object in complete 
darkness, he would remain satisfied with his tactile or kinesthetic experiences’. As 
defined by Klatszky and Lederman (1987), the haptic system perceives cutaneous 
stimuli such as pressure, vibration and temperature on the skin, and the kinaesthetic 
system processes movement, position and force applied to the human’s muscles and 
joints. 
 
 
Loomis and Lederman (1986) identified haptic perception as a combination of 
tactile (through the skin) and kinaesthetic perception (the position and movement of 
joints and limbs). An important aspect of haptic perception is that it is mostly 
obtained by actively exploring objects with the fingers and hands. One study 
investigated how to improve the learning experience for visually impaired young 
children. One way of creating tangible human computer interfaces for visually 
impaired young children is to use alternative keyboards or tablets. The goal is to 
combine the use of real tangible materials with the advantages of information 
technology. The benefit of these devices compared to most haptic devices is that they 
are used in a simple and natural manner. The applications can be manipulated directly 
with fingers by touching and pressing the surface of the device. Handmade or 
industrially manufactured overlays can be set on top of these devices (e.g., Flexiboard 
[Flexi Forum, 2006)] and IntelliKeys [Inclusive Technology, 2006]). 
 

	  
65	  
 
Environment navigation and way-finding applications have also frequently 
used haptic technology. Information such as geometric shapes, floor plans and maps 
can be communicated to the visually impaired through tablets or touchscreen devices 
that are embedded with haptic feedback. Long and Hill (1997) described kinaesthesia 
as ‘a sensation and awareness of movements of muscles, tendons, and joints in the 
body that result from interaction with tactile and environmental stimulus’. 
 
 
In a study by Roth, Kamel, Petrucci and Pun (2000), geometric shapes were 
taught to visually impaired students as raised figures using a printed swell paper 
overlay on a tablet. When shapes were explored, audio feedback was simultaneously 
provided. In another study by Landau (2003), students learned geometrical shapes 
better with the Talking Tactile Tablet by Touch Graphics than they did when using 
common mathematics materials intended for visually impaired students. A much 
earlier study by Holmes and Jansson (1997) also presented a street network in an 
audio-enhanced virtual map. It was found that a tactile map overlay needed less 
exploration time than a matrix overlay. A study by Raisama, Patomaki, Hasu and 
Pasto (2007) from University of Temoera in Finland included a tangible model of a 
tactile map created by Halmes and Jansson to offer better results for the visually 
impaired user. 
 

	  
66	  
 
Fritz and Barner (1997) pointed out the concerns and limitations of haptic 
interface technology: ‘data visualization is a technique used to explore real or 
simulated data by representing it in a form more suitable for comprehension. This 
form is usually visual since vision provides a means to perceive large quantities of 
spatial information quickly’. However, visually impaired or blind people have to 
depend on other senses to perceive particular visual information. Although haptic 
interface technology makes digital information much more accessible and tangible, it 
also provides an additional medium to analyse and explore the data. They also 
suggested that the consideration of a system for the haptic display of common 
datasets that are accessible and recognisable for people with visual impairments could 
be an ultimate solution.  
 
 
 
McDaniel et al. (2005) developed a system called Social Interaction Assistant 
that enabled visually impaired and blind individuals to access non-verbal 
communication cues used during a social interaction with a sighted interaction 
partner. They suggested that providing such non-verbal cues would enhance the 
social skills of those individuals. The system consisted of two components: a pair of 
normal sunglasses embedded with a discrete camera connected to a computer vision 
system and a vibrotactile belt. The computer vision system enabled identification of a 
person, with his or her name delivered as audio. The belt conveyed the location of the 
person in relation to the blind or visually impaired individual, i.e., the user of the 

	  
67	  
system, in addition to the interpersonal distance between the interaction partners. The 
belt was fitted with seven vibration motors spread equidistantly as a semi-circle 
around the user’s waist with the first and last tactors placed at the sides, the fourth 
tactor placed at the midline, two tactors placed between the left side and midline and 
two more tactors placed between the midline and right side. The belt conveyed five 
distances by altering the duration of the vibration, with longer durations inversely 
proportional to a person’s distance. Upon conducting an experiment with the belt for 
location and distance recognition accuracies, the authors found it to be an effective 
mode of communication.  
 
 
A recent article by Brock et al. (2012) showed it was possible to combine 
multi-touch and Kinect sensing to better capture users’ hand motions on a surface. 
The authors applied the system to a map exploration program for visually impaired 
users. Beyond the exploration of tactile maps, the combined system offered an 
interesting and novel apparatus for learning about how visually impaired users read a 
variety of tactile maps with their sense of touch. The prototype included a raised-line 
map on top of a multi-touch table and a Kinect camera observing hands and fingers. 
The authors implemented and compared two algorithms for finger tracking, one using 
an RGB image and one using a depth image. The depth image algorithm presented 
errors when fingers were closed. However, no specific preparation was necessary. 

	  
68	  
The RGB image algorithm was very stable and compatible with different users’ 
exploration strategies. 
 
Tactile Displays/Drawings – The purpose of this study was to review 
effective strategies for exploring tactile graphics, with a view to creating simple 
guidelines that anyone could teach to help users make the most of tactile displays.   
 
 
A review of the academic literature on the subject found various papers 
highlighting the need for a means to teach users how to approach tactile graphics. For 
example, Nolan and Morris (1971, cited in Berlà, 1973) found that blind children 
lacked experience with tactile displays and that their performance in locating symbols 
was very poor. It was suggested that this poor performance resulted from the children 
having no systematic strategies for exploring the display. Furthermore, other studies 
showed how teaching strategies to users improved their performance in particular 
tasks, such as locating points on a display (Berlà, 1973) and reconstructing a map 
after exploration (Berlà, 1981).   
 
 
Indeed, many researchers in this field have reported on the importance of 
teaching blind and partially sighted children the skills to explore tactile graphics. 
Aldrich and Sheppard (2000) suggested that ‘graphicacy’—the ability to understand 
and present information in graphical form—should be a key part of the school 

	  
69	  
curriculum, as it is a skill increasingly needed in society. Knowledge underlying such 
skills may include conceptions of different points of view and an understanding of the 
conventions for how graphics are displayed. Such skills are particularly challenging 
for blind and partially sighted children, who like sighted children cannot be expected 
to understand graphical information without being taught how to do so (Aldrich, 
Sheppard & Hindle, 2002). 
 
 
A good understanding of graphical or visual information may involve two 
types of knowledge: conceptual knowledge of what graphics represent, and practical 
knowledge of how to use them. Examples of the conceptual knowledge required can 
be found in a study by Berlà and Butterfield (1975), who asked teachers about what 
sort of training blind children needed to understand tactile maps. The responses 
included training on spatial relationships, conceptions of measurement, an 
understanding of geometry (concepts such as above/below, parallels and angles) and 
an understanding of how tactile maps relate to reality. Marek (1997) similarly 
highlighted the importance of children’s understanding of the relationship between 
three-dimensional objects and their two-dimensional representations, in addition to 
the spatial relationships between graphic elements. 
 

	  
70	  
 
2.7 AUDIO INTERACTION (HEARING) 
Hearing 
1: the process, function, or power of perceiving sound; 
2: to perceive or apprehend by the ear; 
2: to gain knowledge of by hearing; 
4 a) to listen to with attention . . . 
(Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary) 
 
Hearing has been described as one of the ‘far’ senses. It informs the hearer of events 
that take place from a distance or close by. Rahn (1984) stated that humans can ‘hear 
in total darkness, around corners and behind their heads’. Audio/sound refers to what 
can be heard. Sekuler and Blake (1985) mentioned that a ‘sound starts when some 
mechanical disturbance produces vibrations. These vibrations are transmitted through 
some medium (usually air) in the form of tiny collisions among the molecules in that 
medium’. Rahn (1984) further observed that ‘the normal human ear has a hearing 
range of 16 to 20,000 Hz’. The upper portion of this range prevents people from 
hearing noise created by air molecules, whereas the lower limit prevents people from 
hearing all of the functions of their own bodies (Milne & Milne, 1962). However, 
most people hear best in the range of 2,000–4,000 Hz, as stated in Rahn’s ‘Ears, 
hearing and balance’ (1984).  
 

	  
71	  
 
Similar to touch, human’s perception of sound is affected by several factors, 
some global and some environmentally based. Hearing is unique in that it cannot be 
turned off, even during sleep. Pallasmaa (2005) compared this with the sense of sight: 
‘the eye reaches, but the ear receives’. The listener has little control over the 
production of the sound by people or objects in his or her environment. Although it 
does not require active screening, a listener can pay selective attention to one sound 
over others, thereby enhancing comprehension. Hearing is the main avenue for 
processing oral language and also in many aspects of thinking. 
 
 
Humans are generally less aware of what they are hearing than they are of the 
actions of other senses. It is not until sounds are removed and the atmosphere is eerily 
silent that the full effect of ambient sound is understood. According to Zumthor 
(2006), ‘Interiors are like large instruments, collecting sound, amplifying it, 
transmitting it elsewhere’. Sounds give a space a feeling of ease and ‘home’; Zumthor 
(2006) delighted in the idea that sounds connected him to other people, whether in a 
different room or outside a building. 
 
 
A study conducted by Visell et al. (2009) showed that locomotion usually 
produced audible sounds. These sounds comprise a number of qualitatively different 
acoustical events, such as isolated impulsive signals (e.g., from the impact of a hard 
heel onto marble), sliding sounds (e.g., a rubber sole sliding on parquet), crushing 

	  
72	  
sounds (e.g., walking on snow) and complex temporal patterns of overlapping 
impulsive signals (e.g., walking on gravel). Overall, the structure of such sounds is 
jointly determined by several properties of the source (e.g., the shape and material of 
the ground, the dynamic features of a walking motion, the anthropometric and non-
anthropometric properties of a walker (e.g., weight, leg length, gender and emotion) 
and the properties of the foot surface in contact with the ground (e.g., the materials of 
the sole). Walking thus conveys information about the properties of the sound source, 
and even in the absence of explicit training listeners learn to recover properties of the 
walking event based on the features of the sound. 
 
 
According to Li and Pastore (1991), typical research design in this field 
involves three stages. First, the acoustical specification of the properties of the sound 
source is quantified (e.g., sound frequency is strongly dependent on the size of an 
object). At times, this analysis aims to quantify the perceptual performance of an 
ideal listener who perceives a source property through one or more sound features. 
Second, perceptual data are modelled based on mechanical descriptors of the sound 
source (e.g., McAdams et al., 2004). Third, behavioural data are constructed as a 
function of the sound features. Studies of the human processing of the complexity of 
sounds provide sound designers with some important indications relating to the 
properties of sound that are necessary to have a perceptual effect on humans, 
particularly partially sighted and visually impaired people. 

	  
73	  
 
 
In auditory interfaces, sound and vocal audio are crucial feedback components 
that can be applied in different ways. From the computer game perspective, feedback 
can be designed in two ways: 1) based on audio hints only or 2) as visual feedback 
that makes gameplay significantly easier for both sighted and visually impaired users.  
 
 
 
Meijer (1991) developed ‘The Voice’, which allows auditory feedback to 
replace vision. Columns of pixels represent images and sine waves of various 
frequencies that allow the listener to receive different sound outputs. Meijer (2006) 
stated that visualisation by sound has been widely studied and applied to software for 
visually impaired users for many decades. Historically, the aim has been to display 
visuals such as graphics, line graphs or even pictures using non-speech sound. 
Altering the various attributes of sound such as pitch, volume and waveform allows 
the sound to change according to its visual counterpart (Ghiani, Leporini & Paterno, 
2009). Roth, Petrucci and Pun (2002) used audio and kinaesthetic rendering jointly 
and separately. They found that the audio-kinaesthetic encoding of graphs was the 
most usable approach to visualising shapes for visually impaired users. A year later, 
van den Doel (2003) investigated sound and colour using SoundView, sensing colour 
images by kinaesthetic. This study created an application that allowed a coloured 
surface to be explored with a pointing device. The idea was that the colour, hue, 
saturation and brightness characteristics could be mapped into sounds. This study 

	  
74	  
came the closest to linking the synchronisation of sound, touch and colour. Its 
findings provided guidelines for the present study. 
 
 
Winberg and Hellstrom (2001) developed an interface based solely on audio 
feedback. They also developed a sound model that made it possible for visually 
impaired users to play the popular game, ‘Tower of Hanoi’. They used either three or 
four disks, and each disk had a unique sound differing in pitch and timbre from the 
others. The length of the sound represented the height of a particular disk, and stereo 
panning was used to convey information about which peg a particular disk was on. 
The Tower of Hanoi application was evaluated with pairs of sighted and blind adults 
(Winberg & Bowers, 2004). The sighted person used a visual interface and the blind 
person used the auditory interface described previously. Each participant had to take 
turns moving the disks, and they did not have access to each other’s representations. 
As all of the participants managed to solve the game, it was clear that collaboration 
was possible, even when the participants were provided with either visual or auditory 
feedback. 
 
 
Eriksson and Gardenfors’s (2006) study of the Swedish Library of Talking 
Books and Braille included audio games specifically created for visually impaired 
children. This type of audio game is typically played with a normal keyboard and is 
based on sound and visual feedback. Eriksson and Gardenfors (2006) mentioned that 

	  
75	  
the auditory game was rather challenging for their four participants and concluded 
that non-visual computer games could not provide a good overview of the play area 
as compared with graspable cards. Their advice was to provide proper instructions 
that could help a visually impaired child to understand the mental model of the game. 
 
 
Visella et al. (2009) focused on spatial navigation with sound (i.e., walking 
interfaces). They considered the display and perception of walking-generated sounds 
and tactile vibrations and their current and potential future uses in interactive systems. 
The study showed that the signals of non-visual information sources closely linked to 
human activities in diverse environments were capable of communicating information 
about the spaces that users traversed and the activities they encountered in familiar 
and intuitive ways. However, for these signals to be effectively used in human–
computer interfaces, significant knowledge in many areas is required, including 
knowledge of the acoustic signatures of walking and the design, engineering and 
evaluation of the interfaces that use them. 
 
 
Martinez et al. (2011) investigated visual perception substitution using 
auditory feedback for visually impaired or blind people. According to their system, 
digital images were captured by webcam and transformed into sound patterns. The 
authors concluded that there was a robust correspondence between image and sound 
features. Results provided by the system were high enough to address many of the 

	  
76	  
practical situations that normally required the sense of sight. Much of this expertise 
has been obtained in recent years, although many questions remain unexplored. The 
study highlighted research directions in this multidisciplinary area of investigation 
and pointed to potential future trends. 
 
2.8  
HAPTIC-AUDIO INTERACTION DESIGN (HAID) 
 
To understand the multisensory/cross-modal phenomenon, it is crucial to determine 
where and how information from different senses is combined, especially for users 
who have special needs and physical constraints. Jansson and Juhasz (2007) stated 
that users with severe visual impairment had to work without information obtained 
from the sense of vision, making it more difficult for them to perform tasks. It is 
therefore especially hard for a visually impaired person to get an overview of an 
interface and to find and explore objects and details. Touch and sound are very 
crucial for people who are visually impaired. In such situations, the haptic and audio 
modalities must shoulder the responsibility that would otherwise be taken on by the 
sense of sight. This requires efficient use of the bandwidth of this modality. 
McGookin and Brewster (2006) also mention this point. The integration of haptic and 
audio in effect serves as the ‘eyes’ of visually impaired people in relation to 
simulating visual perception and connection in addition to their sense of spatial 
imagination, particularly in unfamiliar environments. 

	  
77	  
 
 
In general, the use of haptic output for mobile users has already been 
considered in several studies. Berger (2002) suggested that cross-modal interaction 
should be an approach to investigating the human’s visual perception. Considering 
the ventriloquist dummy, she mentioned that according to the human’s visual system, 
sound seems to come from the dummy’s moving mouth. According to the human’s 
auditory system, the sound seems to be coming from the ventriloquist’s mouth. 
Therefore, the perceptual system is faced with the challenge of incorporating these 
inconsistent signals into a coherent impression. This shows that the human’s senses 
have mostly been studied independently of one another and therefore that cross-
modal interaction is not well understood, particularly for the visually impaired or 
blind user. Oakley et al. (2006) investigated and studied an array of nine tactile 
actuators making up a wearable vibrotactile display. Brown, Brewster and Purchase 
(2006) dealt with tactons or structured vibrotactile messages carrying complex 
information. They studied the use of haptic feedback alone to encode three different 
parameters (rhythm, roughness and spatial location) exploiting several vibrotactile 
actuators. These studies highlighted the potential suitability of using mobile devices 
such as PDAs or cell phones. However, it must be noted that their user tests were 
limited to stationary environments.  
 

	  
78	  
 
Brewster, Chohan and Brown (2006) focused on evaluating tactile outputs 
supporting mobile interaction. Their study presented the benefits that could be gained 
from haptic feedback. The results showed that user performance significantly 
improved when a haptic stimulus was provided to alert users about unwanted 
operations (e.g., double clicks or slips during text insertion).  
 
 
The previously cited works mainly focused on the advantages of exploiting 
the haptic system as a complement to the visual system and did not consider solutions 
for visually impaired people users. The literature also contains some proposals for 
supporting visually impaired people users’ mobility. For example, in a study by 
Amemiya and Sugiyama (2008), a haptic direction indicator prototype was proposed 
to support visually impaired users in various emergency situations. User requirement 
studies have indicated that in specific situations (e.g., emergencies) the supporting 
device should be small so that it can be easily held in the hand. Shah et al. (2006) 
proposed a more general-purpose navigation system that would adopt tactile 
perception to inform the visually impaired user about obstacle distance. The authors 
claimed that using multiple sources of vibration to convey information about the 
environment was more effective than audible feedback. Variable and synchronised 
vibration pulses have been used to enhance the user’s sense of orientation and 
distance. The navigation system is based on sonar sensors, an embedded micro-
controller system and an array of vibrotactile actuators. To convey information to the 

	  
79	  
user exploiting the sensitivity of the hand, the authors tried to combine all three tactile 
perception parameters: the location of the active vibrotactile actuator, the intensity of 
the feedback and the pulse duration. However, the proposed hardware seemed to be a 
stand-alone device with no possibility of adaptation to other applications (e.g., 
customising the output of a mobile guide). 
 
 
The recent progress of handheld computers and cell phones has enabled the 
development of compact wearable aid systems for the blind, often in combination 
with RFID or similar technologies. Possible applications relate to indoor solutions to 
support visually impaired people in their mobility and orientation. The 
RadioVirgilio/Sesamonet guidance system designed by Medaglia et al. (2007) is 
based on a cane with an embedded RFID reader and a Bluetooth module. Sensed data 
is sent via Bluetooth to the handheld device (which is also connected to a remote 
server) that guides the user by means of speech-synthesised instructions. This 
solution is based on a general-purpose handheld device that requires blind users to 
follow predefined paths, thus limiting the user’s freedom of movement. The RFID-
based indoor navigation system for blind people proposed by Chumkamon et al. 
(2008) aims to help the user find the shortest path to a destination and to help them if 
they become lost. The proposed system embeds RFID tags into a footpath that can be 
detected by an RFID reader with a cane antenna. The dedicated device is portable and 

	  
80	  
equipped with a headphone for navigation where only voice (i.e., MP3 recordings) is 
used to guide the users. The system, however, does not include any obstacle detector.  
 
 
Willis and Helal (2005) developed an RFID-enabled navigation for the blind 
that allowed detected tags to provide the coordinates of their location along with other 
information. Orientation is supported by vibrotactile output. An interesting novelty of 
this system is that it does not depend on a centralised database. However, like 
RadioVirgilio/Sesamonet, it focuses on navigation through predefined paths marked 
by RFID tags. Medaglia et al. (2007) designed the GLIDEO, a solution that provided 
blind users with audio information about RFID-tagged objects in their surroundings 
(such as temperature and weight). The RFID reader is embedded in a glove to let the 
user freely explore the area.  
 
 
Coroama’s (2006) ‘Experiences from the design of a ubiquitous computing 
system for the blind’ described an assistive system exploiting electronic markers that 
could provide useful information to the visually impaired. Tagged objects are 
detectable by a mobile device that provides descriptive information. Tomitsch et al. 
(2008) proposed exploiting audio-tactile location markers that used an approach of 
combining audible signals and tactile feedbacks to make real-world tags accessible to 
users. Passive near field communication (NFC) tags are used to mark an object. As 
NFC tags are activated at low ranges (below 10 cm), Bluetooth technology is used to 

	  
81	  
locate them from greater distances. An audible signal is used to identify the position 
of the tag when a mobile device (i.e., cell phone) is detected in the neighbourhood 
through Bluetooth exploration. Although this solution exploits both auditory and 
tactile feedback, it seems to be somewhat expensive. Banatre et al. (2004) published a 
proposal for helping blind people in public transportation scenarios. Users rely on a 
mobile device (PDA or mobile phone) with WLAN or Bluetooth connectivity to 
activate a stop request or be informed about the next stop. Although the preceding 
reported solutions for visually impaired people provide information about the 
surrounding environment, Ghiani et al. (2009) stated that most of the related solutions 
failed to assist visually impaired people in freely moving towards the tagged objects 
while simultaneously avoiding potential obstacles. 
 
2.9  
CROSS-MODAL INTERACTION 
 
According to Driver and Spence’s (1998) ‘Attention and the cross-modal 
construction of space’, the brain receives and combines information from different 
perceptual modalities to make sense of one’s environment, such as when watching 
and hearing someone speak. The process of coordinating information received 
through multiple perceptual modalities is fundamental and known as cross-modal 
interaction. Cross-modality is particularly relevant to individuals with perceptual 

	  
82	  
impairments who rely on sensory substitution to interpret information using 
alternative modalities. 
 
 
Oviatt (1999) stated the following: 
Cross-modal Interaction is a term used to describe the integration of 
multiple user input or system output modalities which have the potential of 
promoting richer and more efficient interactive experiences. Cross-modality 
could also overcome the constraints that hinder information flow between a 
system and its users when limited sensory channels are available to convey 
information. 
The visual modality is currently the predominant modality in HCI, but audio and 
haptics are increasingly being used to augment or in some cases substitute for 
graphical displays. Auditory display is the use of speech and non-speech sounds to 
convey information (Kramar, 1992). It is typically used to present information to 
visually impaired people, to draw attention to activity outside of the field of view or 
to provide additional information in situations where the eyes are occupied or there is 
limited screen space.  
 
 
Busse et al. (2005) showed that attention to visual parts of objects could 
enhance processing in the auditory cortex if sound co-occurs with visual percept. In 
addition, Kurtum (2008) stated the following: 

	  
83	  
To date, auditory interfaces have been successfully employed in a 
variety of areas including monitoring applications for complex environments, 
such as operating rooms and aircraft flight decks, improving accessibility to 
visually represented information, and supporting data exploration through 
Sinification. Haptic displays, on the other hand, are interfaces that convey 
information through cutaneous or kinesthetic sensation. They allow visually 
represented objects to be augmented with rich physical properties, such as 
mass and textures, and can be used to simulate most physical sensations that 
can be mathematically represented, such as gravitational fields. 
 
Based on the aforementioned studies, cross-modality is usually achieved using 
vibrating or robotic devices to convey haptic sensations, which allows a user to 
perform physical manipulations like pulling, pushing and feeling objects. Research 
has produced a variety of techniques for conveying information through haptic 
feedback. Tactons, for instance, are a form of structured tactile signal that can be used 
to convey abstract messages non-visually and are equivalent to visual icons and audio 
earcons (Brewster & Brown, 2004). 
 
 
In the design of interactive systems, the phrase ‘cross-modal interaction’ has 
also been used to refer to situations where individuals interact with each other while 
accessing the same shared space through different sets of modalities (Winberg, 2006). 

	  
84	  
Current technological development is making it increasingly feasible to support 
cross-modal input and output in a range of devices and environments, yet there are no 
practical examples of such systems. For example, Apple’s iPhone provides touch, 
visual and speech interaction, but there is no coherent way of collaborating using 
differing sets of modalities if collaborators cannot see the shared screen. Metatla et al. 
(2010) investigated the problem and highlighted the following:  
Our work has so far highlighted the difficulty in designing for cross-
modality collaboration and has raised interesting questions about issues such 
as coherence of representations and support for awareness across modalities. 
Moreover, our initial findings indicate that providing cross-modality 
mechanisms for all team members to collaborate, share, and edit diagrams 
has the potential to increase productivity and to significantly improve the 
working lives and inclusion of perceptually impaired workers. 
 
 
However, despite the progress in cross-modality research, accessibility 
research has shown that simply developing an accessible display does not guarantee 
that collaboration will necessarily be supported, and moreover that the social 
interaction between participants is as crucial as the ability to access and manipulate 
the shared content (Winberg & Bower, 2004). Furthermore, a key drawback of 
current collaborative systems is that they do not explicitly support cross-modal 
interaction where participants have access to differing modalities. This reduces the 

	  
85	  
transformational potential of these systems by systematically excluding collaborators 
with differing perceptual needs. 
 
2.9.1 Ubiquitous Computing 
Weiser (1991) coined and introduced the term ‘ubiquitous computing’. His ideas 
were first exposed to a large worldwide audience by way of his famous article ‘The 
computer of the 21st century’, published in Scientific American in 1991, in which he 
said that the ‘highest ideal’ of ubiquitous computing was ‘to make a computer so 
imbedded, so fitting, so natural, that we use it without even thinking about it’. In 
ubiquitous computing, computers become a helpful yet ‘invisible’ force, assisting 
users in meeting their needs without getting in the way. In recent years, it has been 
broadly adapted, particularly in designing for people with special needs and physical 
constraints. 
 
 
One of the most frequently cited quotations from Weiser’s article is the 
following: “The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave 
themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it.” In 
addition, a deeper understanding of Weiser’s visions can be drawn from his position 
towards three dominant and perhaps overhyped trends in computer science in his 
time: virtual reality, artificial intelligence and user agents. With a good sense for how 
to raise public attention, Weiser criticised these three trends as leading in the wrong 

	  
86	  
direction and positioned ubiquitous computing as a kind of ‘opposite trend’. It 
remains a debated topic to this day. 
 
 
 RCET (2006) stated that the word ‘ubiquitous’ could be defined as ‘existing 
or being everywhere at the same time’, ‘constantly encountered’ and ‘widespread’. 
When applied to technology, the term ‘ubiquitous’ implies that technology is 
everywhere and that users use it all the time. Ubiquitous computing is often 
considered an advancement from the ‘desktop paradigm’. York and Pendharkar 
(2004) defined it more formally as ‘machines that fit the human environment instead 
of forcing humans to enter theirs’. 
 
 
Other terms also invented to described Weiser’s idea include ‘ambient 
intelligence’ (Uwe, 2003) and ‘everyware’ (Adam, 2006), terms emphasising slightly 
different aspects. A taxonomy of properties for ubiquitous computing has been 
proposed. Mühlhäuser and Gurevych (2009) categorised and emphasised the role of 
ubiquitous computing according to different device-related aspects. 
 
2.9.2 Embodied Interaction 
Looking back at how humans have interacted with computers over the decades, 
numerous changes are evident. According to Hemmert (2011), ‘In the 1980s, we 

	  
87	  
interacted with computers in textual ways. In the 1990s, we changed to graphical 
interaction – and in the most recent decade, again, these ways are changing’.  
 
 
The idea of ‘embodied interaction’ reflects a number of recent trends that 
have emerged in the area of HCI. Ishii and Ullmer’s (1997) ‘Tangible bits: Towards 
seamless interfaces between people, bits and atoms’ demonstrated their vision of 
HCI, including how the interface could be moved ‘off the screen’ and into the real 
world. In short, they envisioned that the connection and interaction between users and 
everyday physical objects, environments that contain digital systems and perceptions 
of the digital world could be controlled through users’ senses and bodily movement.  
 
 
Dourish’s (2001) book Where the Action Is proposed a theory of ‘embodied 
interaction’ to conceptualise the changes in how users interact with computers or 
digital devices. According to Hemmer (2011), Dourish pointed out that ‘computing is 
moving into the social and the physical space, and he proposed the term “Embodied 
Interaction”. Advantageously, these new styles of computing draw upon skills that 
users already have, skills that we, as human beings, embody’. As stated previously, 
the idea of ‘embodiment’ is at the centre of phenomenology, an important strain of 
philosophical thought that began at the end of the 19th century. Phenomenology 
rejects the Cartesian separation between mind and body upon which most traditional 
philosophical approaches are based. As the phenomenological tradition has taken 

	  
88	  
embodiment as a central idea, it seems like a good place to turn for help in developing 
an understanding of the role embodiment can play in interactive systems. 
 
 
Focusing on Dourish’s ideas of ‘embodied interaction’, Hemmert (2011) 
discussed and illustrated the role of embodied interaction ‘in the different physical 
and social spaces that we live in’. In the same essay, Hemmert (2011) stated the 
following: 
. . . the new omnipresence of computation brings along a whole new 
world of interactivity. The ways in which we manipulate and experience the 
digital have undergone radical changes in the last decades, and it will be 
exciting to see how these ways will change in the future. In the end, it’s 
probably not humans that should get more technical. It’s technology that 
should get more human. 
 
2.10 
PHENOMENOLOGY AND MUSEUMS  
 
Phenomenology is the ‘science of phenomena’ (Heidegger, 1962). It is also a 
philosophical movement that appeared in the first half of the 20th century 
(Spiegelberg, 1975). It focuses on the experiences of individuals. Indeed, it aims at 
studying ‘phenomena as consciously experienced’ (Spiegelberg, 1975). This 
philosophical underpinning was initiated by Husserl (1936) and his student Heidegger 

	  
89	  
(1962). They encouraged researchers and philosophers to turn ‘to the things 
themselves’ and people to turn ‘to the world as it is already experienced’ (Ilharco, 
2002). Other philosophers like Merleau-Ponty and Sartre also nurtured 
phenomenology through the concepts of self and embodiment (Smith, 2003). 
Although these other philosophers are important in the development of the 
philosophy of phenomenology, this study followed Heidegger’s view as it was 
developed in his book Being and Time (1962). 
 
 
Phenomenology aims at studying individual experiences. Heidegger (1962) 
contended that human beings needed action and praxis with objects (i.e., to engage 
with them) to feel closer to these things (Smith, 2003). Therefore, individuals do not 
need to see an object or imagine it to understand it because it is only a 
‘representational form of intentionality’ (Smith, 2003). This argument leads to the 
conclusion that being able to touch things or to manipulate them contributes to a 
better experience and to better interpretation. 
 
 
As indicated in the title of his book, Heidegger (1962) addresses the question 
of time and its relation to being. Heidegger asserted that time has an ontological 
function, as it constitutes being, and indeed that ‘we are temporal beings not because 
we exist in time but because time is really what composes our beings’ (Dastur, 1993). 

	  
90	  
Temporal beings are open because individuals are always turned towards the future 
and the past, and their self-meaning is not fixed (Lyotard, 1992). 
 
 
In addition, it seems that history plays a role in people’s existence, as it can 
shape their present and future (Monod & Klein, 2005). In effect, historical objects 
represent remains of the past, and consequently they give to people their historical 
dimension. It is thanks to these remains that individuals know something before them 
existed (Heidegger, 1962). However, these historical objects have a secondary 
historicity; they are historical because they belonged to a past humanity and were 
created by historical beings (Lyotard, 1992). 
 
 
In addition, the definition given by Merleau-Ponty in the introduction to his 
Phenomenology of Perception (1945) gives a more specific idea of phenomenology: 
Phenomenology is the study of essences; and according to it, all 
problems amount to finding definition of essences: the essence of perception, 
or the essence of consciousness, for example. But phenomenology is also a 
philosophy which puts essences back into existence, and does not expect to 
arrive at an understanding of man and the world from any starting point other 
than of their ‘facticity’. It is a transcendental philosophy which places in 
abeyance the assertions arising out of the natural attitude, the better to 
understand them; but it is also a philosophy for which the world is always 

	  
91	  
‘already there’ before reflection begins—as an inalienable presence; and all 
its efforts are concentrated upon re-achieving a direct and primitive contact 
with the world, and endowing that contact with a philosophical status. It is the 
search for a philosophy which shall be a ‘rigorous science’, but it also offers 
an account of space, time and the world as we ‘live’ them. It tries to give a 
direct description of our experience as it is. (Merleau-Ponty, 2002)  
 
 
Heidegger’s phenomenology puts a special emphasis on time, human 
existence and experience. Therefore, it seems to be perfectly appropriate to the study 
of art and cultural institutions, particularly museum environments, whose goals are to 
display visual arts and past heritage and focus on visitor experiences. 
 
2.10.1 Phenomenological Framework 
Basically, phenomenology involves the study of the structure of various types of 
experience ranging from perception, thought, memory, imagination, emotion, desire 
and volition to bodily awareness, embodied action and social activity, including 
linguistic activity. Monod and Klein (2005) elaborated a framework to evaluate 
technologies in the museum context. The framework aims to determine whether 
technologies, by meeting user requirements, have interpretive characteristics, and 
whether technologies contribute to a good experience of the past. In their original 
framework, the authors included eight criteria: context, re-enactment, embodiment, 

	  
92	  
self-projection, possibilities of being, historical self, inquiring being and universality 
in uniqueness. However, this study considered four of the criteria: context, 
embodiment, self-projection and possibilities of being. These criteria are defined in 
greater detail hereafter. 
 
Context—the first criterion proposed by Monod and Klein (2005) to provide 
IT users with a phenomenological experience is context. According to the authors, 
context is represented by the shared values, overarching values and beliefs that 
contribute to meaning-making experiences. Indeed, without cultural and historical 
context it is difficult for individuals to have a comprehensive understanding of their 
personal history and of history in general. It is frequently true that at cultural heritage 
sites, visitors do not understand the purpose of an object or even realise its historical 
importance. Indeed, Schärer (1996) contended that information provided within 
museums is generally more structural (some general indications) than cultural 
(information about the earlier context of use). 
 
Embodiment—the third dimension deemed important to the IT user 
experience is embodiment. Embodiment was principally developed as a notion by 
Merleau-Ponty (1962). The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy (1999) defined 
embodiment as ‘the bodily aspects of human subjectivity. Embodiment is not a 

	  
93	  
concept that pertains to the body grasped as a physiological entity. Rather it pertains 
to the phenomenal body and to the role it plays in our object-directed experiences’. 
 
Self-projection—Monod and Klein (2005) proposed self-projection as a 
fourth criterion. Self-projection works by allowing one to put himself or herself 
mentally in the shoes of historical characters and imagine what he or she could and 
would have done in another’s situation. This type of self-projection has both 
cognitive and emotional aspects. The cognitive aspects are linked to the deliberations 
that lead to decisions and actions actually taken, and the affective aspects are related 
to emotions such as love, anger, surprise and joy. 
 
Possibilities of Being—possibilities of being are the fifth phenomenological 
criterion. According to Monod and Klein (2005), a phenomenological experience 
helps people to realise the constraints that have been created by the past and the 
effects on their present life. This leads to the realisation that a different past could 
have resulted in a different present. Reflecting on alternative pasts, individuals come 
to realise how the present could have been different, too. Monod and Klein (2005) 
argued that cultural heritage sites, and more precisely historical characters, 
represented an important vehicle for inspiring this process. 
 

	  
94	  
 
As stated earlier, Ishii and Ullmer (1997) also emphasised and examined the 
concept of embodiment. According to Mingers (2001), embodiment is apparent given 
that ‘our basic attitude is always (exception in pure contemplation) one of doing, 
acting, having some aim in mind, having some concern’. His explanation shed more 
light on the Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy definition. Embodiment designates 
the sensory experiences an individual may have with objects encountered in the 
world. 
 
 
According an essay by Jessie and Noire (2009), in 2007, Pujol Tost and 
Economou surveyed visitors of the Ename Museum in Belgium about their favourite 
rooms and devices at the end of their museum visits. The visitors identified those that 
were able to convey context, empathy, interactivity and sensations. More precisely, 
Pujol Tost and Economou (2007) found that context was one of the visitors’ most 
important expectations. Moreover, empathy contributed to visitor engagement and 
satisfaction. The dimensions of interactivity and sensations (described by the visitors 
as the possibility to touch) also led to better learning. 
 
 
Hence, the phenomenological criteria developed and identified by Monod and 
Klein (2005) appear to be of great importance to visitor experience. As Monod and 
Klein (2005) did not verify their framework in the field, the current study extended 

	  
95	  
their work empirically through a field study of museum visitors. This framework 
served as an important component of the study’s theoretical background.  
 
2.10.2 Museum Experience 
People visit museums for a variety of different reasons. Some visitors are art 
historians doing high-level research on original works, and others visit to spend a 
pleasant afternoon with their families. Some visitors come with significant amounts 
of prior knowledge, and some come with very little knowledge of art or the artists. 
Many different studies have considered the motivations and reasons for visiting an art 
museum. Interestingly, there always seem to be a few common themes when it comes 
to the reasons why people visit art museums. Although people may come to see a rare 
original piece or to achieve some kind of self-fulfilment, most people come to 
socialise or broaden their knowledge base. Some like to have an introspective time, 
and others enjoy a lively intellectual conversation with their companions. The biggest 
reason why visitors go to a museum, regardless of whether they remember to state it, 
is because they are hoping to learn something (Falk, 2009). All visitors come with at 
least some level of prior knowledge upon which they hope to build. They are learning 
new things that are constructed from things they already know. This means they will 
choose a variety of different things to look at in an exhibition, and these things may 
not always align with what those who have designed the exhibit are expecting them to 

	  
96	  
look at. In this way, the museum becomes a choice-based learning environment (Falk, 
2009). 
 
 
 
Sometimes people attend museums by themselves, but more often friends and 
or family accompany them. People enjoy sharing the experience of looking at the 
artwork and discussing what they see. In this way, they can influence each other’s 
museum experience. According to Henry (2010), ‘Learning is both individual and a 
group endeavor and, as a result, is mediated socially and culturally’. Prior knowledge 
and familiarity can lead to a feeling of comfort for the visitor. Some novelty is 
interesting, but too much can become overwhelming (Falk, 2009; Henry, 2010). 
 
As Svabo (2010) stated in her publication Portable Objects at the Museum, a 
central work about museum experiences is the book The Museum Experience by Falk 
and Dierking (1992), which provides a well-rounded understanding of what visitors 
do at museums and what characterises the leisure activity of going to a museum. 
Furthermore, it covers the museum visit from the initial phases of getting the idea of 
going to the museum to how visitors look back on and remember museum visits. It 
thus deals with the before, during and after of the museum experience. 
 
 
A museum visit is a leisure activity, a social outing in line with other 
excursions such as a visit to the park. Visitors go to museums to have a good time, to 

	  
97	  
enjoy themselves and to spend time with friends and family. Visitors do not list 
‘education’ or ‘learning’ as primary reasons for going to museums. Falk and Dierking 
(1991) stated that the visitor’s perspective of the museum is, appropriately, that of a 
consumer of leisure-time activities. It therefore includes images of the gift shop, 
restaurants and the friendliness of staff. 
 
 
Falk and Dierking (1991) further explained that visitors have expectations 
before going to museums. Adults primarily have social expectations of the visit. They 
expect to have a nice time with their fellow visitors, and if these include children, 
adult visitors are typically quite preoccupied with them. Children’s expectations 
differ from the expectations of adults; they are not as socially oriented. Children’s 
interests and concerns evolve around their favourite exhibits (if they have been to the 
museum before) and around the gift shop and food. Children’s expectations do not 
depend on whether they are visiting the museum as part of a school trip or visiting 
with family. The expectations of children visiting with family and as part of a school 
trip are more similar than the expectations of children and adults visiting with family. 
 
 
Museum visits may be memories for life. They are out-of-the-ordinary 
experiences that stand out as something special in everyday life. Falk and Dierking 
(1991) noted that museum visits have long-term effects on learning. The authors 
advocated for a broad definition of learning to encompass the richness of museum 

	  
98	  
experiences, and also stressed that museum learning must be measured over lengthy 
periods, as opposed to taking cognitive measurements of whether a museum visitor 
has built more specific knowledge about a given topic. The authors argued that 
museum learning is a complex, interactive experience that may have profound and 
durable effects. It is important to understand learning in various ways, and thus to 
consider concept, social, aesthetic and spatial learning. 
 
2.11  UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS 
 
WITH DISABILITIES (PWDS) 
 
In December 2006, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) and an Optional 
Protocol to the Convention. The Convention was the first universal human rights 
treaty of the 21st century (in a race to the finish line with the Convention on Enforced 
Disappearance, adopted a week later). 
 
On 1 August 2008, the Government of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
made the following declarations to the Secretary-General about the UNCRPD of the 
HKSAR: 
In accordance with the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China, the Government of 

	  
99	  
the People’s Republic of China decides that the Convention shall apply to the 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. The application of the provisions 
regarding liberty of movement and nationality of the Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 
of the People’s Republic of China shall not change the validity of relevant 
laws on immigration control and nationality application of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China. 
 
The UNCRPD entered into force for the PRC, including the HKSAR, on 31 August 
2008. The HKSAR periodically reviews the need for the continued applicability of 
the relevant reservations and declarations.  
 
This study also reviewed the convention articles, particularly Article 30 – 
‘Participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure and sport’ and the aspect of persons 
with disabilities and their ‘participation in cultural life’, selected as stated: 
1. 
States Parties recognize the right of persons with disabilities to 
take part on an equal basis with others in cultural life, and shall take all 
appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities: 
a) Enjoy access to cultural materials in accessible formats; 
b) Enjoy access to television programmes, films, theatre and other 
cultural activities, in accessible formats; 

	  
100	  
c) Enjoy access to places for cultural performances or services, such 
as theatres, museums, cinemas, libraries and tourism services, and, as far as 
possible, enjoy access to monuments and sites of national cultural 
importance. 
2. 
States Parties shall take all appropriate steps, in accordance 
with international law, to ensure that laws protecting intellectual property 
rights do not constitute an unreasonable or discriminatory barrier to access 
by persons with disabilities to cultural materials. 
3. 
Persons with disabilities shall be entitled, on an equal basis 
with others, to recognition and support of their specific cultural and linguistic 
identity, including sign languages and deaf culture. 
 
The Hong Kong Human Rights Commission is a coalition of eleven non-
governmental organizations including religious, women, community organizations 
and students groups.  It was founded in March 1988.  
 
Although coming from different backgrounds, we share in the belief of the dignity 
and respect of each person and that every man and woman has inherent rights.  As the 
“Human race is one”, the Commission member organizations consider that mutual 
respect, equality and freedom form the foundation on which a just, peaceful, and 
humane society is built.    

	  
101	  
 
Over the years, the Commission has endeavored to promote and protect the human 
rights of the community.  Not only does Hong Kong lack a democratic political 
system, its legislation also allows the government substantial power so as to maintain 
social control.  Civilians are forced to submit to this power and therefore justice often 
fails to prevail.  The Commission has been gathering resources in order to consolidate 
civil power.  By doing so we hope to arouse public concern to the level where the 
people will push the government to reform.  
 
Since it was founded, in addition to lobbying for the Bill of Rights and subsequent 
amendments to the law at local level, the Commission has also submitted reports to 
UN treaty bodies, attended hearings and lobbying at international level.  Recognizing 
that public awareness and participation are vital to the development of human rights, 
the Commission has promoted human rights education through exhibitions, 
gatherings in schools and community centers.  Although the Commission recognizes 
that its work has benefited many, there is the lingering feeling that much more can be 
done. 
 
 
 
 

	  
102	  
 
 
2.12 
THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION (EOC) AND 
 
DISABILITIES DISCRIMINATION ORDINANCE (DDO) 
 
The Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) is an independent statutory body set up 
in 1996 and funded by the HKSAR government. The main functions of the EOC are 
to eliminate discrimination and promote equal opportunities. It is responsible for 
administering the Disability Discrimination Ordinance (DDO), a piece of legislation 
that prohibits disability discrimination, harassment and vilification, in addition to the 
other three anti-discrimination ordinances, including the Sex Discrimination 
Ordinance (SDO), Family Status Discrimination Ordinance (FSDO) and Race 
Discrimination Ordinance (RDO). The DDO came into effect in 1996 before the 
ratification of the Convention. Since the implementation of the DDO, Hong Kong has 
made considerable progress in arousing public awareness and enhancing the 
protection of the rights of persons with disabilities (United Nations, 2012). 
 
 
The EOC does not have any specific authority in the HKSAR government 
decision-making process on disability issues, although it is empowered to keep under 
review the workings of the DDO and to submit to the HKSAR government proposals 
for amending the legislation when it considers necessary to do so. On a day-to-day 

	  
103	  
basis, the EOC mainly influences disability-related decision making by submitting 
alternative reports to relevant United Nations committees, presenting submissions to 
the Legislative Council of Hong Kong, responding to relevant public consultations 
and conducting formal investigations and research to effect policy change. 
 
 
The EOC works towards eliminating discrimination on the grounds of sex, 
marital status, pregnancy, disability, family status and race. The EOC also aims to 
eliminate sexual harassment and harassment and vilification on the grounds of 
disability and race. Furthermore, it seeks to promote equality of opportunities 
between men and women, persons with and without a disability and persons of 
different races, irrespective of family status. The work of the EOC includes 
investigation and conciliation, education and promotion, review of legislation and the 
issuance of codes of practice and guidelines.  
 
 
The DDO came into full operation in December 1996. Under the SDO, it is 
unlawful to vilify a person with a disability in public, or to discriminate against or 
harass a person on the grounds of disability in the specified areas of activities.  
 
The FSDO came into force in November 1997. Under the FSDO, it is 
unlawful to discriminate against a person on the grounds of family status. Family 
status infers a responsibility for the care of an immediate family member. An 

	  
104	  
immediate family member is someone who is related to the person by blood, 
marriage, adoption or affinity. 
 
The RDO came into full operation in July 2009. Race means the race, colour, 
and descent, national or ethnic origin of the person. It is unlawful under the RDO to 
vilify a person on the grounds of race in public, or to discriminate against or harass a 
person on the grounds of race in specified areas of activity. The areas of activity 
covered by the four aforementioned ordinances are broadly the same and include 
employment; education; provision of goods, facilities or services; disposal or 
management of premises; eligibility to vote and stand for election of public bodies; 
and participation in clubs.  
 
2.12 
SUMMARY 
 
This chapter considers the relevant literature to not only address the influences 
and inspirations for the study, but also show how the study attempted to test and 
understand the value of touch and audio from various viewpoints. Although the 
review was written in the format of reported information, a subtle and indirect 
narrative of thought evolved along with the discussion throughout the study. The 
‘touch’ and ‘audio’ modalities were associated with visual information in daily life, 
the history of existence and how to represent visual information to everyone using 
those senses and modalities, whether individually or jointly.  

	  
105	  
 
 
This chapter begins with broad definitions of visual impairment, blindness, 
sense of ‘touch’ and ‘audio’ and then explores the meaning of accessibility of visual 
information. Throughout the literature review, others’ ideas were welcomed and the 
value of their work acknowledged. Although this thesis seeks to convey to the reader 
an open-minded approach to the development of the understanding of touch and 
audio, its views are strict. In this study, technology was seen as a medium. That said, 
the relevant technologies were still discussed and put into perspective within the 
realm of the study. With this objective, the study was positioned as a step towards 
understanding the value of touch and of touch in museums through accessing 
untouchable exhibits using accessible visual information.  
 
 
This chapter builds on the introduction by putting the research topic and 
objectives into context. The next chapter, ‘Methods & Methodology’, clarifies the 
research approach by drawing examples from field observations, user needs analysis 
and two case studies with different materials and proposed prototypes. These projects 
are explained in the succeeding chapters after the methodology is defined. In a way, 
the forthcoming methodologies chapter should form a bridge between the projects 
undertaken by this study and the literature. 

	  
106	  
 
CHAPTER 3 
METHODOLOGY & METHODS 
 
 
 
Overview 
This chapter explains the systematic approaches and methodology 
behind the behaviour and actions attached to the research 
activities. Although it does not aim to introduce the study in full, 
specific references to the study are made to elaborate the relevant 
points in the methodology when necessary. The study is defined 
and explored in greater detail in succeeding chapters. 
 

	  
107	  
3.1 
RESEARCH OVERVIEW 
 
The three areas that researchers often emphasise when considering the 
appropriateness of research design, as suggested by Campbell and Stanley (1963), 
and Cook and Campbell (1979), and Hakim (1987) are:  
1) the aims, purposes or intensions of the study; 
2) the time, money and staffing availability; and  
3) the availability and accessibility of information and sources.   
 
For this study, the goal was to:  
1) understand broad information about the nature of the study topic; and  
2) identify and categorise knowledge related to the research questions.   
 
This study required a deep familiarisation with the topic and an in-depth 
understanding of the target populations. The resulting data and information collected 
were useful for evaluating the research questions and ultimately determined the 
research process.  
 
Hartley and Muhit’s (2003) ‘Using qualitative research methods for disability 
research in majority world countries’ stated the following: 
Qualitative research embraces the view that as far as peoples’ 
perceptions are concerned, there is no one single truth. In other words, 

	  
108	  
different people in different places at different times, interpret things 
differently. This philosophical viewpoint serves to challenge the validity of 
socially oriented data that is collected using quantitative methods. It demands 
an alternative set of methods for exploring peoples’ perceptions, one that is 
contextually and culturally related. It therefore, seeks to find the answer to 
questions about the meaning and individual interpretation of life. It is used to 
answer open questions relating to peoples’ attitudes and beliefs, in a given 
contextual setting.  
 
 
According to Wirz (1996) and Stone (1999), the published research related to 
disability in the majority of the world is somehow limited. Disability research has 
historically and frequently adopted the quantitative methodology (Mitchell, 1999; 
Holeman, 1993). However, Baxter and Jack (2008) published a study that adopted a 
qualitative methodology. They provided an overview of the qualitative methodology 
and types of case studies and developed propositions. Based on a review of many 
quantitative and qualitative studies, including the aforementioned studies, the 
qualitative research methodology was deemed the more appropriate methodology for 
the current study.  
 
Why should the qualitative research methodology be used in disability 
research? A good understanding of disability research is crucial to conducting an 

	  
109	  
effective and efficient study. The targeted populations of this study were visually 
impaired people, who were considered a vulnerable group. There were many sensitive 
issues and considerations to be made, and therefore extra caution was required during 
the interview and pilot study sessions. Some important considerations are stated in the 
chapter entitled ‘Interviews and Pilot Study’. Hartley and Muhit (2003) stated, 
‘Qualitative methods are effective tools when the target group is vulnerable, as 
inevitably so, when focusing on people with disabilities’. They also mentioned that 
most of the disability research published over the preceding decade had been 
quantitative, focusing on either the prevalence of impairments, biomedical issues or 
the efficacy of interventions in numerical terms. This is problematic for conducting 
disability research on a number of counts. The authors also commented that the 
introduction of the social and rights model provided a long overdue challenge to the 
individual/medical model of disability. This served to reflect the social construct of 
disability that had previously been ignored, and particularly applied to the aspects of 
social and cultural art environments/events/activities for visually impaired and blind 
people. 
 
 
A definition by the International Classification of Functioning and Disability 
(ICF) clarified the difference between impairment (described as the deviation from 
the normal functional or structural integrity of a tissue, an organ or a part of the body) 
and disability. ‘Disability’ is an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations 

	  
110	  
and participation restrictions. Disability is characterised as the outcome or result of a 
complex relationship between an individual’s health condition, personal factors and 
other external factors that represent the circumstances in which the individual lives. 
Due to this complex relationship, different environments may have very different 
effects on the same individual with a given health condition. The ICF has also 
described the role of participation as involvement in a life situation. 
 
 
 Based on the aforementioned statement, qualitative research has provided a 
framework in which medical, social and rights models can be combined to give a 
comprehensive/holistic picture of a disability and to achieve improvement in 
disability services and research. Furthermore, there is a need to embrace this 
‘universal model’, particularly from the user-centred design (UCD) process and 
development standpoint. The medical model has traditionally been associated with 
the quantitative approach and as such has struggled to be meaningful when used in 
situations relating to peoples’ complex and dynamic perceptions. These perceptions 
are more effectively described qualitatively. Therefore, this study adopted the 
qualitative research methodology to gain a complete understanding of disability. 
 
General Characteristics of Qualitative Research—a list of the characteristics 
involved in conducting qualitative research are compiled as follows, based on studies 

	  
111	  
by Hoepf (1997), Campbell and Stanley (1963), Biklen and Bogdan (1982), Lincoln 
and Guba (1985), Patton (1990) and Eisner (1991). 
1. Qualitative research uses the natural setting as the source of data. The 
researcher attempts to observe, describe and interpret settings as they are, 
maintaining what Patton calls an ‘empathic neutrality’ (Lincoln and Guba, 
1985; Patton, 1990). 
2. The researcher acts as the ‘human instrument’ of data collection (Hoepf, 
1997). 
3. Qualitative researchers predominantly use inductive data analysis (Hoepf, 
1997). 
4. Qualitative research reports are descriptive, incorporating expressive 
language and the ‘presence of voice in the text’ (Eisner, 1991). 
5. Qualitative research has an interpretive character, aimed at discovering the 
meaning events have for the individuals who experience them and the 
interpretations of those meanings by the researcher (Patton, 1990). 
6. Qualitative researchers pay attention to the idiosyncratic and pervasive, 
seeking the uniqueness of each case (Patton, 1990). 
7. Qualitative research has an emergent (as opposed to predetermine) design, 
and researchers focus on this emerging process and the outcomes or product 
of the research (Biklen & Bogdan, 1982; Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Patton, 
1990). 

	  
112	  
8. Qualitative research is judged using special criteria for trustworthiness 
(Lincoln & Guba, 1985). 
 
According to Richard and Morse (2007), qualitative research methods are best 
suitable if the purpose is to: 
1. Understand an area where little is known or where previously offered 
understanding appears inadequate; 
2. Make sense of a complicated situation, multi-context data and changing or 
shifting phenomena; 
3. Learn from the participants in a setting or a process the way they experience 
it, the meanings they put on it and how they interpret what they experience; 
4. Construct a theory or a theoretical framework that reflects reality rather than 
the researcher’s perspective or prior research results; or 
5. Understand phenomena deeply and in detail. 
 
 
Based on a review of the preceding literature, the qualitative research 
methodology was deemed the appropriate approach for carrying out this research 
project. The methodology was used as a guide throughout the research, particularly 
during the data collection and analysis phases. These phases determined the results of 
the final outcomes and findings. Insights from the following strengths and 
weaknesses table used by Patton (2002) were helpful while carrying out this study. 

	  
113	  
 
Strengths and Weaknesses of Qualitative Research—understanding the 
strengths and weaknesses of qualitative research should help to provide a holistic 
view of the methodology. The strengths and weaknesses of qualitative research are 
listed in the following table (Table 01). These strengths and weaknesses served as a 
checklist of what strengths to emphasise and weaknesses to compensate for to 
maximise data collection while conducting this study. They also indicated where data 
were inefficient or inadequate. 
 
Table 01: Strengths and Weaknesses of Qualitative Research (Patton, 2002) 
Strengths 
• Qualitative research data are based on the participants’ own categories of meaning. 
• Qualitative research is useful for studying a limited number of cases in depth. 
• It is useful for describing complex phenomena. 
• It provides individual case information. 
• It can be used to conduct cross-case comparisons and analysis. 
• It provides understanding and a description of people’s personal experiences with 
phenomena (i.e., the ‘emic’ or insider’s viewpoint). 
• It can be used to describe, in rich detail, phenomena as they are situated and 
embedded in local contexts. 
• The researcher can identify contextual and setting-related factors as they relate to 
the phenomenon of interest. 
• The researcher can study dynamic processes (i.e., documenting sequential patterns 
and change). 
• The researcher can use the primarily qualitative method of ‘grounded theory’ to 
determine a tentative but explanatory theory about a phenomenon. 

	  
114	  
• Qualitative research can be used to determine how participants interpret 
‘constructs’ (e.g., self-esteem, IQ). 
• The data are usually collected in naturalistic settings in qualitative research. 
• Qualitative approaches are responsive to local situations, conditions and 
stakeholders’ needs. 
 
Weaknesses 
• The knowledge produced may not be generalisable to other people or other settings 
(i.e., findings may be unique to the relatively few people included in the research 
study). 
• Qualitative research makes it difficult to make quantitative predictions. 
• It makes it more difficult to test hypotheses and theories. 
• It may have lower credibility with some administrators and commissioners of 
programmes. 
• It generally takes more time to collect qualitative research data than it does to 
collect quantitative research data. 
• Data analysis is often time-consuming. 
• The results are more easily influenced by the researcher’s personal biases and 
idiosyncrasies. 
	  
	  
	  
Taylor, Williams and James (2005) created a very detailed and precise table 
comparing the qualitative and quantitative research methods. This table (Table 02) 
provides a view of how to compensate for and complement the strengths and 
limitations of the two methodologies to capitalise on their strengths and offset their 
limitations. To compensate for the limitations of one approach, most agree that the 

	  
115	  
strengths of the other approach must be adopted. This is very clear and easy to 
understand for the novice researcher. 
 
3.1.1 Case Study 
After considering the research objectives, practical constraints (location, time, 
funding, etc.), availability of sources and physical constraints of the potential 
participants, a case study approach was adopted for this study. Hartley and Muhit 
(2003) strongly recommended the case study approach in their discussion of research 
methods for people with disabilities. The case study method aims to develop in-depth 
analysis of a programme, an event, a process or an individual. This study used 
multiple sources of data through reviewing documents, archival records, field 
observations, interviews and pilot studies to illustrate the case in-depth. Long 
interviews were conducted with a limited number of participants to develop patterns 
and relationships of meanings as experienced and described by those participants. 
The objective of phenomenological research is to understand the essence of human 
experience of a phenomenon, as described by participants. 
 
 
Yin (2003) mentioned that a case study should be considered when 1) the 
focus of the study is to answer ‘how’ and ‘why’ questions, 2) the behaviour of the 
participants cannot be manipulated, 3) it is necessary to cover contextual conditions 
that are relevant to the phenomenon under study or 4) the boundaries between the 

	  
116	  
phenomenon and context are unclear. Furthermore, according to Merriam (1988), 
qualitative methodology emphasises the ‘process, discovery, insight, understanding, 
and context’ and contributes ‘to the knowledge base and practice of education’. 
Furthermore, according to Creswell (1994), qualitative methodology categories 
emerge from information rather than from identification ‘a priori by the researcher’ 
and that ‘this emergence provides rich context-bound information leading to patterns 
or theories that help explain the phenomenon’. 
 
 
The following brief definitive table of the case study methodology provides a 
clear direction for the process of this study. 
Definitions of Case Study from Different Authors 
Researcher/ 
Author 
Definition 
Merriam (1988) 
A qualitative case study methodology emphasises ‘process, 
discovery, insight, understanding, and context’ and contributes ‘to 
the knowledge base and practice of education’. 
Bromley (1990) 
 
A case study is a systematic inquiry into an event or a set of 
related events that aims to describe and explain the phenomenon 
of interest. 
Creswell (1994) 
In a qualitative case study methodology, categories emerge from 
information rather than from identification ‘a priori by the 
researcher’ and ‘this emergence provides rich context-bound 
information leading to patterns or theories that help explain the 
phenomenon’. 

	  
117	  
Yin (2003) 
A case study should be considered when 1) the focus of the study 
is to answer ‘how’ and ‘why’ questions, 2) the behaviour of the 
participants cannot be manipulated, 3) it is necessary to cover 
contextual conditions that are relevant to the phenomenon under 
study or 4) the boundaries between the phenomenon and context 
are unclear.  
Thomas (2011) 
Case studies are analyses of persons, events, decisions, periods, 
projects, policies, institutions or other systems that are studied 
holistically using one or more methods. The case that is the subject 
of the inquiry is an instance of a class of phenomena that provides 
an analytical frame—an object—within which the study is 
conducted and which the case illuminates and explicates. 
 
 
 
To ensure comprehensive data collection, the limitations of the case study 
method were considered while deciding the approach for this study. By understanding 
the limitation, it is possible to find an alternate solution to compensate for the 
weaknesses of the method.  
 
3.1.2 Types of Case Study 
 
The selection of a specific type of case study design is informed by the overall 
study purpose. In general, there are seven types of case study: 1) explanatory, 2) 
exploratory, 3) descriptive, 4) multiple case, 5) intrinsic, 6) instrumental and 7) 
collective. However, Yin (2003) categorised case studies as exploratory, descriptive 
and explanatory, and Stake (1995) identified case studies as intrinsic, instrumental or 

	  
118	  
collective. The following definitions for three types of case study that are relevant to 
this study could optimise the final outcome. 
 
Definition and Examples of the Three Types of Case Study 
Case Study Type Definition 
Published Study Example 
Exploratory 
This type of case study is used 
to explore situations in which 
the intervention being 
evaluated has no clear, single 
set of outcomes (Yin, 2003). 
Lotzkar & Bottorff (2001).  
An observational study of the 
development of a nurse-
patient relationship. Clinical 
Nursing Research, 10, 275–
294. 
Descriptive 
This type of case study is used 
to describe an intervention or a 
phenomenon and the real-life 
context in which it occurred  
(Yin, 2003). 
 
Tolson, Fleming & Schartau 
(2002). Coping with 
menstruation: Understanding 
the needs of women with 
Parkinson’s disease. Journal 
of Advanced Nursing. 
 
Gallo & Horton (1994). 
Assessing the effect on high 
school teachers of direct and 
unrestricted access to the 
Internet: A case study of an 
East Central Florida high 
school. Educational 
Technology Research and 
Development.  

	  
119	  
Intrinsic 
Stake (1995) used the term 
‘intrinsic’ and suggested that 
researchers with a genuine 
interest in a case should use 
this approach when the intent is 
to better understand the case. It 
is undertaken not because the 
case represents other cases or 
illustrates a particular trait or 
problem, but because in all of 
its particularity and 
ordinariness the case itself is of 
interest. The purpose is NOT to 
come to understand some 
abstract construct or generic 
phenomenon. The purpose is 
NOT to build theory (although 
that is an option) (Stake, 1995). 
Hellström, Nolan & Lundh 
(2005). ‘We do things 
together’: A case study of 
‘couplehood’ in dementia. 
Dementia. 
	  
 
	  
 
Based on the literature review, the descriptive case study approach was 
deemed suitable for this research project. This approach allowed intensive analysis of 
an individual unit (e.g., a person, group or event) and stressed developmental factors 
in relation to context (Baxter & Jack, 2008) with the selected participants (visually 
impaired people) and the museum environment serving as the context. This study was 
conducted based on in-depth field observation and interviews with visually impaired 
participants. As Thomas (2011) stated, ‘this type of case study is an analysis of 

	  
120	  
persons, events, decisions, periods, projects, policies, institutions, or other systems 
that are studied holistically by one or more methods’. Furthermore, based on 
Siggelkow’s (2007) statements, as the real-life cases were complex and provided rich 
data, they were a great source for sharpening current theory, especially in situations 
where theoretical knowledge was limited.  

	  
121	  
3.2 
DATA COLLECTION 
 
Qualitative data from the case studies consisted of detailed descriptions of events, 
people, interactions and situations. One of the strengths of using case study research 
is the ability to use multiple methods of data collection (Merriem, 1998). This study 
used varies types of data collected through comprehensive literature reviews, 
intensive field observation and in-depth interviews and pilot studies. This required a 
systematic plan of operation. To achieve this goal, a conceptual framework for 
conducting research (Figure 6) was adopted to organise, control and carry out the 
study process efficiently and also to accomplish the study’s final outcomes within the 
proposed timeframe. The research phase outline is presented later. 
 
 
Figure 6: Data collection framework. 

	  
122	  
 
3.2.1 Documents 
Merriam (1998) suggested that the researcher must first decide whether a document is 
relevant to the study and whether the information is complete, and then determine the 
authenticity and accuracy of the document. Determining the credibility of the sources 
is often required. The researcher should look at the origin, author, intended audience 
and resources used to create the document. Lincoln and Guba (1985) defined a 
document as ‘any written or recorded material’ not prepared for the purposes of the 
evaluation or at the request of the inquirer.  
 
 
A major part of the data collected for this study was based on the selected 
written and recorded documents. Data were collected based on an initial round of 
field observations, interviews and a pilot study, which according to Merriam (1998) is 
the most effective data collection instrument used for case study research. Document 
research helps to uncover meaning, develop understanding and discover insights 
relevant to research questions. The documents used in this study included a range of 
academic literature, articles, conference papers and public documents such as 
newspaper articles and brochures. The main sources included Art Beyond Sight 
(2003), all six of the Haptic & Audio Interaction Design (HAID) conference papers, 
and the international conference papers ‘Computers Helping People with Special 
Needs (ICCHP – last 10 years) published by vom Lehn. 
 

	  
123	  
 
Records provided insights into a setting and/or group of people that were very 
useful for this study. They provided useful information about the culture of the 
institutions and participants involved in the study, and assisted in the development 
and evaluation of the research questions, objectives and methodology. Information 
from documents was particularly useful in formulating the interview questions and 
identifying events to be observed. The information contained in the documents was 
very useful in the interviews and participant observation activities, particularly in 
terms of clarifying and providing support for the analysis. 
 
3.2.2 Field Observation 
The field observations of Emerson, Fretz and Shaw (1995) described experiences and 
observations the researchers witnessed first-hand. They described field observation as 
a resource for ‘preserving experience close to the moment of occurrence’. This type 
of data collection typically involves recording the events as they take place. Merriam 
(1988) noted that field notes usually include a verbal description of settings and 
conversations. She advised leaving the margins open for additional comments, 
reactions and interpretations.  
 
 
In-depth field observations and interviews were completed early in this study. 
The 11 highest rated museums in Hong Kong (based on the HK Tourism Board, 
2011) were selected. 

	  
124	  
The main aims of the field observation were to observe the environment of the 
museum and specifically:  
1. to observe and understand the current status of the digitisation of the art 
museum; 
2. to observe and understand the current status of the museum’s facilities in 
supporting visually impaired and blind people (in both the overall museum 
and specific exhibitions); 
3. to identify the cultural aspects of the museum and the educational 
programmes relevant to this research project; and 
4. to meet people who were ‘experts’ in the field of museum environment design, 
particularly in relation to programme development and planning for disabled 
visitors. 
 
  
The findings showed that the basic facilities used to assist visually impaired 
people in the museums were insufficient. Very limited facilities such as museum 
tactile maps, tactile guide paths, braille descriptions for exhibits and an accessible 
website for visually impaired people were found in these museums. The Hong Kong 
Museum of Art provided services that were accessible to visually impaired and blind 
people (see Appendix 1). 
 

	  
125	  
 
3.2.3 Interview and Pilot Study 
The interviews and pilot study comprised additional primary data collection methods. 
Merriam (1998) emphasised that the main purpose of an interview is to obtain 
information that cannot be collected through observation. Along with gathering 
factual knowledge, interviewing is an ideal method for obtaining information about a 
subject’s personal feelings, perspective, opinions and interpretations. The interviews 
and pilot study were conducted to obtain in-depth information about the participants. 
Cohen and Manion (1980) mentioned that one of the advantages of interviewing is its 
higher potential to gather more information than any other method of data collection. 
Reinharz (1992) emphasised the advantage of interviewing as a method of obtaining 
access to an individual’s thoughts and memories in his or her own words rather than 
those of the researcher. This was particularly important in this study, as it involved 
visually impaired and blind participants. 
 
 
Preliminary interviews and pilot studies were conducted during the first phase 
of this study. Twelve visually impaired people were selected for the interviews. For 
the pilot study, selected participants were asked to complete a conceptual paper 
prototype test. The test included three types of tactile imagery with different degrees 
of tactile detail and heights. The imagery was supported with a manual auditory 
function. During the prototype testing, the manual auditory description closely 
followed the finger movement of the participants while touching the tactile imagery 

	  
126	  
to imitate or simulate the effect of the HAID feedback. The preliminary interviews 
and pilot study had two major goals: 1) to refine the research question(s) and 
methodology and 2) to develop a framework for data collection and analysis. The 
refined interview questions and conception paper prototype were used in the second 
phase of this study. 
 
 
The interviews consisted of semi-structured interviews with open-ended 
questions based on the research questions. Topics covered in each interview included 
1) the participant’s visual impairment background, 2) the participant’s visual 
impairment experience, 3) the participant’s visual perception and 4) the accessibility 
of the museum (particularly in terms of the participant’s understanding of the exhibits 
and the information he or she received). In addition, the participants were asked to 
complete the conceptual paper prototype supported with a manual auditory function 
(a manual human speech description that closely followed the movement of the 
participant while touching the tactile imagery to simulate the effect of the HAID 
feedback and sensation). The interview questions were modified as appropriate to the 
context of the interviews, but always reflected the research aims, objectives and 
questions. This is why the semi-structured interview with open-ended questions 
approach was adopted in this study. 
 

	  
127	  
Semi-Structured Interview and Open-Ended Questions—according to 
Kvale (1996), interviews are: ‘attempts to understand the world from the subjects’ 
point of view, to unfold the meaning of peoples’ experiences, to uncover their lived 
world prior to scientific explanation’. The advantages of the semi-structured 
interview and open-ended questions are important, particularly in relation to 
information transfers between participants and researchers. von Hippel (2005) 
characterised information as ‘sticky, (i.e., it is actually very hard to transfer 
information about users’ needs and contexts from the users to the developer). 
Therefore, it was important to allocate enough time to speak with the participants in 
connection with the interviews and pilot study. It was important to learn more about 
1) the background information of the participants, 2) how the participants faced and 
overcame problems in everyday life, 3) the problems the participants continued to 
find hard to master and 4) the ideas the participants had for solving those problems, 
particularly from a visual perception and interpretation viewpoint. 
 
 
Based on the UCD approach, the most frequently used planned interview 
scenario has historically been the post-test interview, during which questions about 
the user interface and its goals, function and efficiency have been put to the test 
participant. This approach was adopted in this study. The participants were asked to 
express ideas for improvement or other applications. This typically led to more 
explicit and longer answers. The questions usually began with ‘what’, ‘why’ and 

	  
128	  
‘how’. An open-ended question was asked to obtain the participant’s viewpoints, 
feelings or understanding of certain subjects, which could be personal and subjective. 
It helped to provide an in-depth understanding of the participant. The information 
collected was crucial for refining the research questions and the interviews questions 
for the second phase (which was scheduled to be carried out before the end of 
October 2012). The timeline is discussed in a later section (‘Planned Study 
Schedule’). The participants were asked follow-up questions to clarify or pursue any 
interesting subjects further. Closed questions with preferred answers that included a 
rating scale or yes/no questions were also asked. 
 
 
All of the questions for the interviews and pilot study were based on the 
‘tactile imagery guiding principles’ proposed by Fuller and Watkins (2010) and the 
‘elements of visual image interpretation principles’ proposed by Lillesand and Kiefer 
(1994) as a fundamental guide (see Appendices 2 and 3). 
 
 
 
The pilot study used the conceptual paper prototype as mentioned earlier. A 
pilot study is a small experiment designed to test logistics and gather information 
before a larger study is conducted to improve the quality and efficiency of the latter. 
The pilot study may reveal the deficiencies of a proposed experiment or procedure, 
and these can then be addressed before resources are expended on a large-scale study. 

	  
129	  
The book Experimental Design for the Life Sciences by Ruxton and Colegrave (2006) 
suggested a few useful points pertaining to conducting a pilot study: 
1. Check that the instructions given to participants (e.g., randomisation 
procedures) are comprehensible.  
2. Check that the participants are sufficiently skilled in the procedures.  
3. Check the reliability and validity of results. 
4. Detect a floor or ceiling effect (e.g., if a task is too difficult or too easy there 
will be skewed results). 
5. Identify adverse effects (pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm) caused by 
the procedure. 
 
 
When dealing with participants with physical constraints, such as visually 
impaired and blind target populations, some important considerations must be made 
when conducting interviews or pilot studies. Aldridge (2007) stated the following: 
. . . it has been argued that research that employs qualitative methods 
among vulnerable groups must reconcile the conflict between meeting 
recognized academic criteria, or measures of research ‘strength’, while at the 
same time appropriately and effectively representing the experiences and 
needs of vulnerable respondents. 
 

	  
130	  
Goodley and Moore (2000) also identified the ‘bottom-up’ approach to research, 
where studies are primarily located ‘in the lives of disabled people themselves’: 
This points not only to the need for flexibility and diversity in terms of 
dissemination practices, but also to the idea that research design and 
implementation must be equally tractable. Thus, as researchers engaged in 
qualitative research we should not only explore tried and tested methods of 
investigation, but must also try and test methods that may not at first seem 
obvious. 
 
 
 
All collected data and obtained information were used to develop a 
preliminary outline of the categories of this study. The data were identified and 
categorised to refine and improve the second round of interviews and the pilot study. 
They were also used to help evaluate whether the interview results would be useful in 
answering the research questions. Through critical analysis, the methodology was 
evaluated further and enhanced where needed. 
 
3.2.4 Paper Prototyping 
In UCD, paper prototyping is a widely used low-fidelity usability inspection method 
to evaluate drafts in an early stage of product design. This study focused on tactile 
paper prototypes for user interfaces. The participants evaluated the HAID technology 

	  
131	  
via mock-ups that provided low functionality and consisted of different tactile 
imagery.  
 
Miao, Kohlman, Schiewe and Weber (2009) investigated tactile paper 
prototyping (TPP) with blind subjects and stated that TPP user interfaces were an 
effective approach that could be evaluated with blind users in an early design stage. 
 
 
Conceptual Tactile-Audio Paper Prototyping—Miao, Kohlman, Schiewe 
and Weber’s (2009) evaluation method should allow for user interface evaluations 
that also respect the users’ needs. The integration of haptic prototyping techniques 
into their methodology is conceivable, as interface elements with a structured surface 
can be used to indicate certain details in compensation for highlighting visual mock-
ups. The aforementioned case helped to provide some useful guidelines for the tactile 
paper prototype in this study. To be able to perform tests with visually impaired 
people and blind subjects, 1) a conceptual tactile paper prototype based on the HAID 
setting was used, 2) tactile imagery consisting of different contents and visual 
elements and information were used and 3) participants had to identify the contents 
and visual elements and information. To analyse the effect of the combination and 
synchronisation of the haptic and audio technologies, a manual human speech audio 
followed the finger movements of the participant as he or she touched the tactile 
image. 
 

	  
132	  
 
In a much earlier study, Heller (2000) and Kennedy (1993) stated that tactile 
pictures (tactile and two-dimensional imagery) had a great deal of potential utility for 
visually impaired and blind people. The following served as a guide while conducting 
the TPP method. 
1. Consider general issues when hosting blind users. 
2. Provide adequate facilities according to the special needs. 
3. Check for special hardware and software required. 
4. Design mock-ups not for sighted but for blind users. 
5. Even better, have blind people design the mock-ups. 
6. Proofread the mock-ups before conducting the test. 
7. Check the recording before and during the test, as repetition is expensive. 
8. Provide a sufficient number of assistants. 
9. Make sure that mock-ups are provided synchronously to each subject. 
10. Allow for sufficient time to explore the mock-ups. 
11. Explain from the blind users’ perspective. 
 
3.3 
 VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY 
 
Merriam (1998) defined internal validity as the extent to which the findings from a 
research study were congruent with reality. A researcher can pursue many strategies 
to ensure internal validity. Yin (1994) suggested that three principles could help ‘to 

	  
133	  
deal with the problem of establishing the construct validity and reliability of a case 
study’: 1) create a case study database, 2) use multiple sources of evidence and 3) 
maintain a chain of evidence. One model established by Sapsford and Jupp (1996) to 
access validity included triangulation, respondent validation and reflexivity. 
According to Sapsford and Jupp (1996), this was accomplished by ‘comparing the 
data produced by different methods’. This supported the proposed multiple data 
collection methods such as the reviewing of documents, field observations, interviews 
and pilot study. 
 
3.4 
SUMMARY 
 
This chapter presents the methodological approach adopted to realise the thesis 
objectives and describes how a creative research methodology was appropriately 
planned and structured. It introduces my roles and actions as a researcher and 
illustrates the relationship between these roles and actions by drawing examples from 
the practices adopted in addition to tables and diagrams. Although no new 
methodology was invented for this study, the collective application of methods 
formed a new way to present the methodologies mentioned in this chapter, a process 
that I declared as the ‘practice of touch’. This declaration was made not only because 
this study focused on seeking the missing tactile information about an untouchable 
object, but also to recognise the value of the sense of touch and the continuity of the 

	  
134	  
human element in the process of ‘making’. This chapter also clarifies the similarities, 
differences and common uses of practice-based and practice-led research. In doing so, 
it pinpoints how the current research sits within the boundaries of both, and how it 
must eliminate misconceptions within the field to realise its position. 
 
 
In addition to addressing the practices of this study via four projects, I also 
declare my writing as a practice, and cherish its traces from previous drafts, 
depending on the section and work being discussed. I realised this process by 
adapting a visual artist’s method as a model for writing, a method involving 
drawing/erasing layers onto the same paper over and over and leaving traces behind 
each time to be able to draw again. Although I found this to be a messy way of 
working, it taught me that research is an organism and that as a researcher I must 
sometimes let go of the process. When applied to writing, this process feeds the 
artistic development of the research and the academic development of the bricoleur. 
This led me to consider writing as a journey, and with the aid of Foucault’s author-
function concept I learned to see the experience behind actions as the author of the 
process (not the persona of an individual, but the ‘voice’ of a narrator/researcher). I 
tried to illustrate the relationship between my actions and methods through a simple 
diagram early in the thesis, and later on within a more developed table to include how 
the research was realised and what influenced it. This table is placed at the end of this 
chapter, as it summarises the methodology in relation to my practice.  

	  
135	  
 
After this clarification of roles and methods, it is now appropriate to move on 
to the projects and report their conclusions. This is done in the next two chapters 
before progressing to the ‘Critical Discussion and Analysis’ of the thesis and its 
concepts, rather briefly but firmly and as a whole. 

	  
136	  
CHAPTER 4  
CASE STUDY: HONG KONG MUSEUM  
   
 
 
ENVIRONMENTS 
  
 
 
Overview 
The development and implementation of the field observations, 
pilot studies, prototype testing and drawing test were 
fundamental parts of this study and the crucial primary data 
collection approaches. In this chapter, the development and 
implementation approaches are introduced through three 
separate case studies: field observations conducted in Hong 
Kong and two separate pilot studies that focused on aspects of 
the accessibility of visual information and the usability of user 
interface design, based on the proposed concept of Haptic-
Audio Interaction Design (HAID). A simulated paper 
prototype was tested with a group of visually impaired 
participants. 
 
In the final pilot study, two museum masterpieces were 
transformed into tactile displays and later synchronised with 
audio descriptions. Drawing tests were conducted in the last 
stage of the pilot study, which revealed the effectiveness of the 
cross-modal interaction design approach in helping visually 
impaired people to improve their construction of mental 
imagery. 
 

	  
137	  
4.1  
INTRODUCTION 
 
The day-to-day living environment is significantly becoming an information society, 
an environment in which information is a fundamental resource used in all walks of 
life, particularly in the forms of graphics, images and visuals in print and digital 
media. As the world becomes more complex, there is an increasing need to make 
greater use of visual information at work and school and in social and leisure 
environments. Moore’s (2000) study of the Royal National Institute of Blind People 
(RNIB) in the UK discussed one’s need to be able to access and understand such 
information simply to function as a kind of social being. According to the same study, 
a lack of access to information prevents individuals from playing their part as citizens 
and makes then unable to benefit fully from all that society has to offer, which also 
contributes directly to social exclusion and discrimination. 
 
 
In the mid-1980s, the Hong Kong government published the Design Manual 
Access for the Disabled, which incorporated legislation to accelerate the improvement 
of the accessibility of public space to better aid individuals with disabilities. The 
manual was meant to align with the implementation of the United Nation Declaration 
on the Rights of Disable Persons (1975) guidelines, which promoted social equality 
and integration for individuals with disabilities. The Equal Opportunities Commission 
(EOC) of Hong Kong implemented its strategy to overcome barriers to buildings and 

	  
138	  
community facilities in the mid-1990s, which involved promoting the anti-
discrimination ordinances, including the Disability Discrimination Ordinance. In 
recent years, the foci of the associated policies and guidelines have extended to 
cultural facilities and community areas such as museums, parks and community halls 
and centres. However, the visually impaired still face major difficulties in visually 
oriented environments such as galleries, museums and heritage sites. 
 
In this chapter, the research methods are presented along with the procedures 
and findings of the individual case study and pilot testing, which developed a 
conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype that simulated the idea of a haptic-audio 
interaction design (HAID) approach for the visually impaired. The cross-modal 
interaction approach was proposed and tested to assess how multisensory feedback 
could be provided to visually impaired visitors. The aim was to investigate the 
effectiveness of the HAID platform in helping the visually impaired to construct 
mental images of exhibits and thus enable meaningful museum experiences. 
 
First, documents related to how museums understand and perform their roles 
in supporting visually impaired visitors were reviewed. The findings of various 
studies and projects showed that museum environments, exhibitions and programmes 
still fail to consider the actual wants and needs of visually impaired visitors, 
especially in terms of the accessibility of visual information (see Buyurgan, 2009; 

	  
139	  
Fuller & Watkins, 2010; Jiménez Hurtado et al., 2012; Carfagni et al., 2012). Second, 
in-depth field observations and interviews were conducted in 11 major museums in 
Hong Kong, and the findings revealed that the visually impaired were a little-noticed 
segment of the museum audience and that the museums offered very few basic 
facilities and resources to aid their mobility and access to information about exhibits. 
 
In the first case study, semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions 
were conducted with 12 invited visually impaired participants. The participants were 
asked about their viewpoints, feelings and understanding of subjects, which could 
have been personal and subjective. A preliminary pilot study was also conducted and 
found that many of the participants were reluctant to visit museums in Hong Kong 
because they felt excluded. In the second case study, another pilot study and addition 
semi-structured interviews were conducted. The selected visually impaired 
participants took part in tests of three medium-fidelity conceptual tactile-audio paper 
prototypes that were supported by audio descriptions to simulate the effect of a HAID 
approach that offered multisensory feedback. The purpose of this pilot study was to 
investigate the effectiveness of touch-activated sound systems that integrated an 
exhibit’s visual information with its tactile displays. Finally, the participants were 
asked to draw the mental images they had constructed during the tests to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the cross-modal interaction approach that integrated haptic (touch) 

	  
140	  
and sound (audio). They were indeed able to capture some of the visual elements of 
the exhibits. The results and findings are presented in a later part of this chapter. 
 
Based on the identification and understanding of the user needs and variables 
important to the visually impaired participants, prototypes were designed and 
evaluated. Based on the findings in this part of the study, a conceptual tactile-audio 
paper prototype that simulated the HAID approach was proposed and developed. The 
final outcomes of that process and the overall findings of this study should contribute 
new information and guidelines to key stakeholders such as policymakers, museum 
representatives, gallery owners, curators and designers. Furthermore, the findings 
should provide insights into the design of visual art events intended to create a more 
equal and inclusive social environment, including for those visitors who are visually 
impaired or blind. 
 
4.2 
 FIELD OBSERVATIONS: HONG KONG MUSEUMS 
 
Emerson, Fretz and Shaw (1995) described field observations as ways of ‘preserving 
experience close to the moment of occurrence’. This type of data collection involves 
recording events as they take place. Merriam (1988) stated that field notes usually 
include a verbal description of settings and conversations. She advised researchers to 
leave the margins open for additional comments, reactions and interpretations. In-

	  
141	  
depth field observations and interviews were conducted during the early stages of this 
study. The main foci of these field observations were investigation and understanding 
of the current Hong Kong museum environments and their accessibility for visually 
impaired visitors.  
 
4.2.1 Procedure 
The 11 highest rated museums in Hong Kong (HK Tourism Board, 2011) were 
selected for in-depth field observations and interviews. The overall aim was to 
observe and analyse mobility and accessibility in the museum environment. The 
specific aims were to: 
1. review the current status of museum digitisation (both hardware and 
software); 
2. review the current status of the museum’s facilities for supporting visually 
impaired and blind people (both the overall museum environment and specific 
galleries and exhibitions); 
3. identify the cultural aspects and educational programmes of the museums that 
were relevant to the study; and 
4. meet people who were museum ‘experts’, particularly in relation to exhibition 
curation, design, programme development and planning for disabled visitors. 
 

	  
142	  
 
When analysing our field observations, we followed the guidelines laid out in 
the RNIB’s (2009) ‘Access to exhibitions and collections for blind and partially 
sighted people’. These included whether the museum was: 
1. inviting visitors to touch works of art that were in some way tactile, perhaps 
as part of a touch trail, a guided tour or a tactile exhibition; 
2. describing works of art/audio descriptions; 
3. producing tactile images or models representing works of art; 
4. allowing people to get close to works of art, perhaps to use low-vision aids 
such as magnifiers, and ensuring works of art were well lit; 
5. commissioning artwork that was appreciated through senses other than sight; 
and 
6. providing information about works of art in accessible formats (e.g., large 
print, audio cassette, braille) and transcribing information into audio and 
braille. 
 
4.2.2 Results 
The museums had insufficient basic facilities to assist visually impaired visitors. The 
visually impaired could not access visitor information, interior settings were rather 
challenging to navigate and display text was too small in general. Museum staffs 
were sometimes uncertain about the facilities and resources the visually impaired 
could access. Furthermore, the museums had very few facilities such as tactile maps, 

	  
143	  
tactile guide paths, tactile diagrams of exhibits, braille descriptions for exhibits, 
guided tours, educational programmes and websites that the visually impaired could 
access. 
 
An investigation of 11 Hong Kong museums managed by the Leisure and 
Cultural Services Department revealed insufficient basic facilities for visually 
impaired people. There were very few facilities such as tactile maps, tactile guide 
paths, braille descriptions of exhibits and websites accessible to visually impaired 
people. An overview of the facilities for visually impaired and blind visitors at the 11 
Hong Kong museums managed by the Leisure and Cultural Services Department is 
provided as follows. 
 
	  
Museums 
Tactile Guide 
Paths 
Tactile 
Maps 
Braille 
Descriptions 
of Exhibits 
Audio 
Kits 
Tactile 
Imagery 
Guided Tours 
Visually 
Impaired 
Workshop 
Hong	  Kong	  
Museum	  of	  
Art	  
Entrance	  of	  
the	  museum	  
only;	  not	  in	  
the	  exhibition	  
hall.	  
YES	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
NO	  
YES	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
NO	  
	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Heritage	  
Museum	  
Entrance	  of	  
the	  museum	  
and	  
information	  
counter	  only;	  
not	  in	  the	  
exhibition	  
hall.	  
YES	  
YES	  
(on	  limited	  
exhibits	  only;	  
leaflets	  and	  
booklets)	  
NO	  
NO	  
YES	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
NO	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Science	  
Museum	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  

	  
144	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Museum	  of	  
History	  
Entrance	  of	  
the	  museum	  
and	  
information	  
counter	  only;	  
not	  in	  the	  
exhibition	  
hall.	  
NO	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  regular	  
visitor	  only)	  
NO	  
YES	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
NO	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Space	  
Museum	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Museum	  of	  
Coastal	  
Defense	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
NO	  
Law	  Uk	  
Folk	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Dr	  Sun	  Yat-­
sen	  
Museum	  
(Hong	  
Kong)	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Railway	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
NO	  
Lei	  Cheng	  
Uk	  Han	  
Tomb	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
Sam	  Tung	  
Uk	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(however,	  
guides	  are	  not	  
trained	  to	  
facilitate	  visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
NO	  
 
	  
 

	  
145	  
4.3 
USER NEEDS ANALYSIS AND FIRST PILOT STUDY 
 
Gould and Lewis (1983) recommended focusing early on users and tasks, performing 
empirical measurement and adopting an iterative design. Gould (1985) later described 
the system design and development process as comprising four phases: the gearing-
up, initial design, iterative development and system installation phases. In this study, 
user needs analysis was conducted as part of the initial design phase. The iterative 
development phase focused mainly on iterative usability testing. 
 
 
User needs analysis is widely recognised as the core of human-centred design. 
To develop a truly usable platform, interaction or system for visually impaired 
people, analysis of user needs is particularly crucial. There are many variations in the 
way users think and behave. The diversity in all people—who and where they are, 
what they are doing, how they are doing it and what they hope to achieve—is 
influenced by their physical, physiological and psychological characteristics. The 
social, political and cultural contexts in which people carry out their everyday 
activities are also influencers. 
 
 
In this study, the main focal point in conducting user needs analysis was the 
identification and understanding of the current problems faced by the visually 
impaired visitors when accessing information in and moving around museums. 

	  
146	  
Indeed, the visually impaired users’ requirements, perceptions and expectations of 
museums were taken into account throughout the entire study, including the design 
and development of the prototypes, pilot study planning and final mock-up of a fully 
operational prototype. It was also considered how individuals who were visually 
impaired could access and interpret visual information in their daily activities. Their 
visual perceptions and perceptions of the devised cross-modal interaction system 
were also foci. Finally, preliminary tactile diagram testing was conducted in the first 
pilot study. 
 
 
According to Ruxton and Colegrave (2006), a pilot study is a small 
experiment designed to test logistics and gather information before a larger study is 
conducted with the aim of improving the quality and efficiency of the latter. The pilot 
study has the potential to reveal the deficiencies of a proposed experiment or 
procedure, which can then be addressed before resources are further expended. 
 
4.3.1 Procedure 
A user needs analysis interview was conducted with 12 visually impaired participants 
in separate sessions. The members and social workers of Hong Kong Blind Union 
introduced the visually impaired participants. All of the participants had visited 
museums. Semi-structured interviews were conducted to allow the participants to talk 
comfortably. The questions focused on the participants’ experience of visiting 

	  
147	  
museums, their motives or intentions for those visits and their expectations of 
accessing information about the exhibits. The interviews also included open-ended 
questions that focused on the participants’ preferred museum environments, whether 
they needed assistive technologies or facilities to navigate the museums and the 
accessibility of information about the exhibits. 
 
Preliminary tactile diagram tests were conducted after the interviews. These 
tests included three different of types of tactile diagrams. The first diagram (Figure 7) 
was taken from the Black Book of Color, a tactile book by Cottin and Faria (2006). It 
adopted the ‘spot UV’ or ‘spot varnished’ printing technique to represent the tactile 
effect. The second diagram (Figure 8) was taken from the book Invisible Power, 
produced by the Japanese Blind Association (2000). A ‘thick pigment’ layer, which 
provided a soft and embossed surface, created the tactile effect. The printing method 
suggested by Axel and Levent (2002) in Art Beyond Sight was adopted for the third 
tactile diagram (Figure 9). The diagram was printed on microcapsule (swell) paper. 
The three diagrams consisted of different materials, degrees of tactile detail and 
density and height of tactile effects. Each diagram was supported by verbal 
description of the interviewer. The participants were asked open-ended questions 
during the tactile diagram tests. 
 
 

	  
148	  
     
 
Figure 7: First tactile diagram –‘Spot UV’ or ‘spot varnished’ printing  
technique that had a tactile effect. 
 
 
  
 Figure 8: Second tactile diagram – ‘Thick pigment’ layer that provided  
a soft and embossed tactile surface. 
 

	  
149	  
 
    
Figure 9: Third tactile diagram – Printed on microcapsule papers (swell paper); 
recommended by Art Beyond Sight. 
 
4.3.2 Results 
Through the participants’ interviews and preliminary tactile diagram testing, insights 
were obtained that could be used in the HAID simulated conceptual tactile-audio 
paper prototype design in the second pilot study. All of the participants mentioned 
that the museums they had visited lacked enough accessible information to allow 
them to independently circulate and appreciate the exhibits. They had to depend on 
their companions to describe the museum space and each exhibit. This frustrated 
them, and they felt they were interrupting their companions, who could not appreciate 
the exhibits. Essentially, they were reluctant to go to museums because they felt 
excluded.  

	  
150	  
 
The results of the tactile diagram tests indicated that the third diagram (Figure 
9) on the microcapsule paper was best for simulating the sense of touch. It conveyed 
the richest tactile information and generated better perceptions of visual, depth and 
spatial composition. None of the participants had ever used tactile diagrams in 
museums and were impressed by how they overcame the limitations of other 
methods. As independence in gaining information about exhibits was important to 
them, some had tried reading braille descriptions. However, doing so can be a slow 
process; the information can be limited, and not all visually impaired people can 
actually read braille. Six out of the twelve visually impaired participants mentioned 
that although listening to audio descriptions through a handheld device was helpful, it 
was still hard to visualise the exhibits. They all mentioned that being able to touch an 
exhibit made it easier to understand.  
 
 
Based on these findings, a user-centred design approach was proposed, 
comprising a HAID tactile paper prototype that would combine a tactile diagram and 
audio description to provide multisensory feedback. Wickens et al. (2004) stated that 
prototyping played a central role in both heuristic evaluation and the usability testing 
of product concepts. These are key factors in a user-centred design process and more 
generally in ergonomics engineering. They are also crucial in conducting studies with 
people with disabilities.  
 

	  
151	  
4.4 
CONCEPTUAL TACTILE-AUDIO PAPER PROTOTYPING AND 
 
SECOND PILOT STUDY  
 
Miao, Kohlman, Schiewe and Weber (2009) developed a method for evaluating user 
interfaces while respecting subjects’ needs. Their methodology provided some useful 
guidelines for the development of the medium-fidelity HAID conceptual tactile-audio 
paper prototype used in this study. When performing the user testing, tactile diagrams 
were used; these diagrams were well printed on microcapsule paper, differed in their 
visual elements and included visual information that had been simplified but still 
covered all of the important elements of the original exhibits. Audio descriptions 
supplemented the diagrams. The focus was on how the visually impaired participants 
interacted, reacted and responded while using the prototype, and how they identified 
the visual elements, content and so on as they constructed their own mental images. 
 
 
In this section, the design and development of the conceptual tactile-audio 
paper prototype is presented. It is identified as the major outcome of this study, as it 
integrated the visual information of two-dimensional museum exhibits that were 
converted into touchable tactile displays and audio descriptions that were easily 
accessible to the visually impaired. Based on the main theory behind this work, the 
conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype followed the idea of opening up the concepts 
of touch and sound and was used to further investigate and discuss the effectiveness 

	  
152	  
and limitations of the experimentation of haptic (touch) activated integral auditory 
(sound) systems. The following guided questions were asked throughout the 
development of the prototypes and the implementation of the case study. 
1. Can the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype present the visual 
information of the two-dimensional museum exhibits? 
2. Can the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype improve the mental imagery 
construction of the visually impaired? 
3. Can the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype represent HAID simulation? 
4. Does the tactile display provide enough/too much haptic simulation that is 
easily accessed by the visually impaired? 
5. Does the audio description provide enough/too much visual description that 
can be associated and understood by the visually impaired? 
6. Can the visual information be perceived and understood by the visually 
impaired based on the adaption of the conceptual tactile-audio paper 
prototype? 
7. Can the proposed idea of HAID enhance the museum experience of the 
visually impaired? 
8. How can the museum experience of visually impaired visitors be enhanced 
with the proposed HAID? 
 

	  
153	  
 
The second pilot study involved three different user tests, semi-structured 
interviews and in-depth observations. All of the questions used in the interviews and 
pilot studies were based on Fuller and Watkins’s (2010) ‘Research on effective use of 
tactile exhibits with touch activated audio description for the blind and low vision 
audience’. Lillesand and Kiefer’s (1994) ‘Elements of visual image interpretation 
principles’ were used as the guiding principles for the interview questions (see 
Appendices 2 and 3) images were expected to:  
1. increase awareness, knowledge or understanding of a particular topic, 
concept, phenomenon or theory; 
2. increase engagement or interest in the theme(s) of the exhibit; 
3. change attitudes about a particular topic, concept, phenomenon or theory;  
4. change behaviour about an exhibit topic; and  
5. increase perceptual, observational and interpretive skills as a result of the 
exhibit experience. 
 
 
In the development of the HAID conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype, 
various possibilities and proofs of concept were explored. This was an open-ended 
preliminarily exploration, and the tools used had to be both flexible and affordable 
because time and resources were limited. In addition, the International Usability 
Standard: ISO 13407 (Figure 10) was adopted. ISO 13407 specifies the following 
principles and activities that underlie user-centred design: 

	  
154	  
1. there is an explicit understanding of specific users, tasks and environments; 
2. users are involved throughout design and development; 
3. the design is driven and refined by user-centred evaluation; 
4. the process is iterative; and 
5. the design addresses the whole user experience. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: User-centred design process model; ISO 13407 (1999). 
 
 
 
This standard describes how these principles and activities can be applied to 
specifying and measuring the usability of the final design, specifying and evaluating 
usability during the design process and specifying and measuring a workable system. 
It includes three annexes, providing an example of how to specify the context of use, 

	  
155	  
examples of usability measures and an example of a usability requirement 
specification. 
 
4.4.1 Procedure 
Six completely blind participants were invited to participate in the user testing. The 
participants were asked to complete conceptual tactile paper prototype tests. Findings 
from the first pilot study, interviews and in-depth observations were used to inform 
the information structure of the conceptual tactile paper prototypes used in the second 
pilot study. Two tactile diagrams on microcapsule paper were used, supplemented by 
professionally produced audio descriptions.  
 

	  
156	  
     
Figure 11: Tactile diagram – ‘Mona Lisa’ by Leonardo da Vinci. 
 
 
Figure 12: Tactile diagram – ‘The Persistence of Memory’ by Salvador Dali. 

	  
157	  
 
 
The first diagram (Figure 11) was a recreation of Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona 
Lisa and the second (Figure 12) was a re-creation of Salvador Dali’s Persistence of 
Memory. The audio descriptions used in conjunction with these diagrams are 
currently used by the Musée du Louvre (Figure 11) and the New York Museum of 
Modern Art (Figure 11) to assist visually impaired visitors. Three separate tests were 
conducted. 
 
 
First Test: The participants were told to touch and explore the tactile diagram 
without receiving any information or descriptions. The Think Aloud Protocol method 
(Chandrashekar et al., 2006) was adopted, and participants were encouraged to talk 
about their interpretations, ask questions and so on. 
 
Second Test: A brief introductory audio description was activated before and 
during the interaction with the tactile diagram. The participants were again 
encouraged to talk about their interpretations and ask questions. Limited guidance 
and suggestions were given. 
 
 
Third Test: A brief introductory audio description was activated before and 
during the interaction with the tactile diagram. More guidance and suggestions were 
given, specifically to identify the object to which the audio description was referring. 
An extra function—‘point description’ (Figure 13)—was also offered to the 

	  
158	  
participants. The participants could press buttons embedded in the tactical diagram to 
hear audio descriptions of the selected visual element/object. Upon the completion of 
all three tests, the semi-structured interviews were conducted. Finally, the participants 
were instructed to draw the images they had constructed mentally during the testing. 
 
 
  
 
Figure 13: HAID simulated tactile paper prototype – To create the sensation of 
pressing a button to activate the ‘point description’ function on the prototype, metal 
pins were embedded in the back of the diagram. The diagram was glued to a form-
board, which stimulated haptic force feedback when participants pressed on the 
tactile surface.  

	  
159	  
4.4.2 Results 
The three HAID tactile paper prototypes and drawing tests revealed that tactile 
diagrams without audio descriptions were meaningless; the participants expressed 
major confusion and uncertainty. They valued the brief introductory audio description 
because it provided a brief image of the tactile diagram. Furthermore, the participants 
varied in their relation to and interest in the visual arts. This strongly indicated that a 
HAID museum platform would need to personalise the information it offered to suit 
the individual preferences of visually impaired visitors. Along these lines, the 
participants appreciated the ‘point description’ function that enabled them to further 
enhance their mental images of the exhibits.  
 
 
However, the participants still found it difficult to identify objects in the 
tactile diagrams at the beginning of the tests, even with the use of the audio 
descriptions. They were also concerned about various elements of those descriptions, 
such as their lengths and speed, optional functions to pause or repeat, the actual 
narration and the lack of directional information about the spatial composition of the 
tactile diagram or tactile element. Finally, all of the participants said that if museums 
used HAID platforms they would be motivated to visit and encourage others to do so. 
 
 
The results of the drawing test were mostly positive. The participants’ 
drawings (Figures 14–16) showed that they had imagined the general shapes of the 

	  
160	  
selected visual elements in the tactile diagrams. This indicated the great potential of 
the cross-modal interaction approach to help visually impaired people evoke and 
construct clearer mental images, which could ultimately enhance their museum visits. 
 
 
Figure 14: Drawing test – The shape and spatial composition of the visual elements 
are well captured. 
 
    
Figure 15: Drawing test – The shape of the object is very close to the original visual 
element. 
 

	  
161	  
 
Figure 16: Drawing test – The participant identified the visual elements in the tactile 
diagram and their spatial composition. 
 
4.5 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CASE STUDIES 
 
Access to information about museum exhibits is crucial for visually impaired visitors, 
who need to construct mental images of exhibits that are detailed enough to make 
them feel that their museum experience has been worthwhile. The concept of creating 
a barrier-free and accessible museum environment for visually impaired and blind 
visitors should be redefined; accessibility of the physical environment is equally 
important to accessibility of exhibit information and content. Although the conceptual 
tactile-audio paper prototype focused on touch (haptic) and sound (audio) as the main 
ways to establish multisensory interaction and feedback, it also encouraged the 
participants to express their feelings and insights about the use of cross-modalities to 
perceive and understand the visual information, the challenges involved in accessing 

	  
162	  
such interfaces and the availability of such accessible options in Hong Kong museum 
environments. 
 
 
The results showed that the adaption of the cross-modal interaction approach 
to creating a HAID platform that provides multisensory feedback for visually 
impaired visitors has great potential to help these visitors construct mental images of 
exhibits. At the same time, it would also improve the social inclusiveness of the 
visually impaired. The iterative process used in this study allowed for the design of a 
system based on the user needs of the visually impaired, addressing their capabilities 
and limitations. Future research should be undertaken in line with all of the following 
recommendations that stemmed from the pilot studies and interview sessions with the 
visually impaired participants. 
1. A ‘pre-visit introduction’ is crucial in preparing the visually impaired to 
interact with unfamiliar museum exhibits. The brief introduction given during 
the second pilot study provided brief imagery of the tactile diagrams. 
2. A ‘personalised’ option, such as the ‘point description’ option discussed in 
this thesis, is needed in assistive interaction systems to offer visually impaired 
or blind individuals an enriching and engaging museum experience. 
3. Assistive interaction systems in museums should feature cross-modal 
interactions/interfaces with a combination of haptic/tactile and audio 
elements.  

	  
163	  
4. ‘Reference points’ should be included on the tactile diagrams used in these 
systems to help visually impaired users associate the spatial composition of 
the tactile diagrams. This would effectively provide a ‘guided tour’ of 
exhibits. 
5. The audio aspects of the systems should include the ability to pause, repeat or 
speed up or slow down the narrative. 
 
  
The atmosphere and exhibitions in a museum and their spatial connection 
influence the museum experience of the visually impaired. The research activities 
implemented in this study were limited and did not allow all of the related aspects to 
be tested in terms of how they affected the individual’s museum experience. Thus, it 
became crucial to create a high-fidelity HAID platform in the real-life context for 
another round of user testing and evaluation to collect all of the necessary data and 
achieve a more in-depth understanding of how to improve social inclusiveness and 
interaction by enhancing the museum experience for visually impaired visitors. 

	  
164	  
 
CHAPTER 5  
CRITICAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview 
This chapter focuses on a critical discussion and an overall 
analysis of the concepts and ideas formed throughout this 
study, guided by the identified research aims and objectives 
and the formulated research questions. It begins with a 
discussion of the integration of touch and sound interaction. 
This is based on results and findings from the user needs 
analysis and the first pilot study, which focused on comparing 
the different types of tactile display materials and audio 
descriptions that were best at simulating the sense of touch and 
conveyed richer tactile information that provided better 
perceptions 
of 
visual 
information, 
depth 
and 
spatial 
composition. 
 
Further discussion and analysis of the methods adopted in this 
study and the methodological problems are presented. The 
chapter ends by considering the problems and challenges from 
different aspects and the stakeholder standpoint.  
 
 
 
 
 

	  
165	  
5.1  
INTEGRATION OF TOUCH (HAPTIC) AND SOUND (AUDIO) FOR 
THE VISUALLY IMPAIRED 
 
This study focused on the accessibility of visual information for the visually impaired 
to improve their process of constructing mental imagery of untouchable museum 
exhibits, with the ultimate aim of enhancing their experience of Hong Kong museum 
environments. It attempted to stay away from searching and investigating the 
historical meaning of ‘object knowledge and museum’ or the philosophical context of 
‘phenomenology perception’. Instead, it emphasised an in-depth examination and 
understanding of the human interaction and interpretation of touch (haptic) and audio 
(sound), in addition to how the visual information of the untouchable museum 
exhibits could be delivered and perceived by the visually impaired through an 
accessible option that affected their museum experience. This does not mean the 
study was not committed to identifying and understanding the reasons for such 
perception and performing corrective actions.  
 
 
At the beginning of this study, there were uncertainties and anxieties about 
staying away from the conventional path; however, the findings and outcomes 
reflected a bridging of the gap between museum exhibits and visually impaired 
visitors. This also means that the approach actually brought the ‘museum object’ 
closer in this study. The methods implemented in this study, such as field 

	  
166	  
observations, user needs analysis, case studies, pilot studies and conceptual paper 
prototype testing provided significant findings and an all-round understanding of 
user-centred design approaches, a workable cross-modal interaction approach and an 
accessible option for the visually impaired to improve the perceiving and 
understanding of visual information. 
 
 
As the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototypes were created and developed, 
visual information about museum exhibits were mostly identified and interpreted by 
sight only—in some cases by touch or sound—and then used as material to convey 
and interpret the visual information about the selected two dimensional exhibits as the 
accessible prototype. Discussion and analysis of the relationship between haptic 
(touch) and audio (sound) was applied throughout the entire prototype creation and 
research activity stages of the user needs analysis and literature review. In other 
words, the visual information presented via the prototype and the selected museum 
exhibits were closely associated with user characteristics and needs. This indirectly 
yet strongly reflected the user-centred design process discussed in Chapter 2. 
 
During the literature review stage, the findings revealed limited literature and 
documentation focusing on the accessibility of visual information about museum 
exhibits for visually impaired or blind visitors in a museum environment. Despite 
much effort, individuals who are visually impaired are still facing major challenges in 

	  
167	  
highly visual-oriented environments such as museums. The accessibility of visual 
information about exhibits within a museum environment is crucial for the visually 
impaired to construct visual mental images for the exhibits. Based on these findings, a 
user-centred design (UCD) was proposed to create a haptic-audio interaction design 
(HAID) simulated tactile paper prototype that adopted the cross-modal interaction 
approach (a combination of tactile display and audio description) to provide 
multisensory feedback for the visually impaired. 
 
Salmen (1998) stated that the most effective way to communicate a museum’s 
dedication to accessibility is to include an accessibility policy statement or a 
declaration within the overall mission statement of the museum. A museum’s 
philosophy on its commitment to accessibility may be integrated into all of its 
functioning activities, such as its policies, guidelines, plans, budgets, meetings, 
conferences, panels and community outreach, to form its accessibility statement. 
 
 
The accessibility of visual information about museum exhibits is crucial for 
visually impaired visitors to construct visual mental images of the untouchable 
exhibits and ultimately to enhance their museum experience, with the aim of a more 
accessible and inclusive museum environment in Hong Kong. Given its objectives of 
gaining a deeper understanding of ‘touch and audio’ interaction as a fundamental 
concept, this study in general investigated the effectiveness and concerns associated 

	  
168	  
with HAID by adopting a cross-modal interaction approach that provided 
multisensory feedback for visually impaired visitors, which had the potential to help 
them evoke and construct visual mental imagery and add a unique quality to an 
interface. The investigation led to analysis of user needs and to pilot testing of tactile 
displays and/or audio descriptions that offered visual information accessible to 
visually impaired visitors, with a focus on the touch-activated audio description 
interactive approach. The idea of the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype, an 
interaction design prototype, formed an appropriate case study. The prototype was 
used as an accessible interface between visually impaired participants and museum 
exhibits, and the concept was supported by other case studies and experiments as 
discussed in previous chapters.  
 
 
The results of this study reflected the research questions and objectives, which 
focused on the accessibility, user experience and considerations of the cross-modal 
interface design approach for the visually impaired. The findings reveal information 
about social inclusion and communication, which strongly affect visually impaired 
individuals by allowing them to explore, learn and share their museum experiences 
with others in addition to their personal insights on museums exhibits. However, 
despite the highly adopted human-centred design approach and the rapid development 
of assistive technologies to assist individuals who are visually impaired or blind, 
users’ involvement and participation throughout the design process is crucial; it 

	  
169	  
focuses on what should be done from the viewpoint of user need, in addition to the 
consideration of and consequences for the visually impaired. The findings also reveal 
concerns and recommendations for a user-interface design that can adopt the cross-
modal interaction approach to accessing visual information and enhance the museum 
experience of the visually impaired. Creating simpler, easier access requires more 
humane interaction approaches. 
 
5.2  
SINGLE MODALITY OR CROSS-MODALITIES 
 
The act of touch starts from the moment an individual wants to reach out and feel 
what he or she sees. The urge to touch is almost spontaneous. One touches with one’s 
eyes if one has sight; this is followed by thought, and then the thought touches back, 
as stated by Derrida (2005). Touch occurs all the time; it can be a physical interaction 
or a state of mind delivered by sound or verbal description. However, the sound or 
verbal description must take a recognisable or associable form to trigger the process 
of mental imagery construction. 
 
The results of the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype showed that tactile 
display without verbal description could mean as much as a textural surface to the 
visually impaired. In this case, the modality of audio (sound) could serve as a form of 
touch based on thought. 
 

	  
170	  
5.3  
PROBLEM WITH DIRECT REPLICAS 
 
Although some museums provide options that allow visually impaired or low-vision 
visitors to touch direct replicas of certain exhibits, certain concerns have been raised 
based on the viewpoints of the visually impaired. Providing a replica of a museum 
exhibit may preserve the original, but what does this do to the experience of visitors, 
particularly those without sight? Are direct replicas too detailed for the visually 
impaired, who rely solely on their sense of touch? 
 
 
 An identical embossed version taken directly from a two-dimensional 
painting is defined as a form direct replica. Such replicas often present all of the 
details of the original artwork. Although such replicas provide an accessible option 
for the visually impaired to touch the replica, the amount of detail on the replica 
surface may be overwhelming for these individuals. The representation and 
interpretation of visual information about a two-dimensional artwork on a tactile 
display version should result in a simplified version of the original artwork (Axel & 
Levent, 2002). All of the tactile displays created for this study were carefully 
converted and made into simplified versions so that they could be easily understood 
by the visually impaired participants during the pilot testing processes.	  	  
	  

	  
171	  
 
When developing an accessible and interactive museum exhibit system for the 
visually impaired, types and degrees of visual impairments should be considered. 
How individuals react, choose to manage or are affected by their own disability also 
define whether an exhibit’s information design is a success (Onol, 2011). Therefore, 
the interpretation of tactile display and audio description should accommodate 
various optional features as part of the accessible interface if possible to allow the 
user to personalise his or her experience. 

	  
172	  
CHAPTER 6   
CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
Overview 
The previous chapters review the case studies and investigate 
the effectiveness of the haptic-audio interaction design (HAID) 
approach through the proposed conceptual tactile-audio paper 
prototypes. Pilot testing and interviews were conducted. 
Encouraging and positive findings indicate a high potential for 
helping the visually impaired to perceive visual information 
and improve the process of mental image construction. This 
chapter concludes the thesis. Answers to the research questions 
formulated in Chapter 1 are summarised, and an evaluation of 
the research process and a reflection on the actions and 
approach taken to achieve the main objectives of the study are 
given. The discoveries made during the investigation are also 
discussed. Future development of this study and further studies 
of related research topics are also suggested. 

	  
173	  
6.1 ANSWERS TO THE RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
 
Central Research Question: How can haptic-audio interaction design (HAID) help to 
enhance the museum experience for visually impaired people in a Hong Kong 
museum environment? 
 
Key Research Questions: 1) What are the key characteristics of interactivity for the 
visually impaired? 2) How can the characteristics of interactivity be incorporated 
into a HAID museum platform design that leads to greater accessibility for the 
visually impaired and blind?  
 
In response to these research questions, this study took an important first step towards 
investigating and understanding the inclusivity of the Hong Kong museum 
environment and how it facilitates visually impaired and blind visitors. Furthermore, 
the ways in which visually impaired people react to the concept of the HAID 
approach as proposed in this study were considered through field observations and a 
series of case studies.  
 
A document published by the United Nations (2012), The Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, stated that ‘everyone has the right to freely participate 
in the art and cultural life of the community’. Many efforts have been made to shift 
the perspective of accessibility to create more inclusive art and cultural environments 
for individuals with disabilities. However, the visually impaired still face multiple 

	  
174	  
challenges in perceiving and understanding information about museum exhibits. The 
accessibility of visual information about museum exhibits is crucial for visually 
impaired visitors to construct visual mental images about untouchable exhibits, 
enhance their museum experience and ultimately create a more accessible and 
inclusive museum environment. With the objective of gaining a further understanding 
of ‘touch and sound’ interaction as a fundamental concept, this study investigated the 
effectiveness of and concerns over using HAID and the cross-modal interaction 
approach. This approach provides multisensory feedback for visually impaired 
museum visitors and may help them to evoke and construct visual mental imagery.  
 
 
The study analysed user need and then conducted pilot testing using tactile 
displays and/or audio descriptions that offered visual information accessible to 
visually impaired visitors. The study focused on the touch-activated audio description 
interactive approach. A conceptual interaction tactile-audio paper prototype was used 
as an accessible interface between the visually impaired participants and museum 
exhibits. The concept was also supported by other case studies and experiments 
discussed in previous chapters.  
 
 
The results reflected the research questions and objectives, which focused on 
accessibility, the user experience and the cross-modalities interface design approach 
for the visually impaired. The findings reveal information about the aspects of social 

	  
175	  
inclusion and communication that strongly affect visually impaired individuals by 
allowing them to explore, learn about and share their museum experiences and 
personal insights into museum exhibits. Users’ involvement and participation 
throughout the museum design process is highly crucial when focusing on what 
should be done from the viewpoint of user needs and on the considerations and 
consequences of the effects on the visually impaired. This involvement should create 
a simpler, more accessible and more humane interaction approach for the visually 
impaired. 
 
6.2 
 REVISITING THE RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
 
Objective 1) To investigate whether a touch interaction and audio description with 
untouchable visual information can be achieved with the aid of an accessible 
interface between visually impaired visitors and an untouchable museum exhibit. 
 
Objective 2) To explore the effectiveness of a system that integrates an exhibit’s 
visual information using the cross-modal interaction approach of HAID and how the 
system helps to improve the ability of the visually impaired to access visual 
information when constructing mental imagery. 
 
In the study, HAID was simulated using conceptual tactile-audio paper prototypes 
that integrated the visual information of two-dimensional museum exhibits by 
converting it into touchable tactile displays that included audio descriptions. The 

	  
176	  
prototype was easily accessed by the visually impaired participants. The conceptual 
tactile-audio paper prototype was used as the main tool in this study to explore the 
concepts of touch and sound and the effectiveness and limitations of haptic (touch) 
activated integral auditory (sound) systems. The ultimate goal was to enhance the 
museum experience of the visually impaired via a proposed accessible option that 
improved their perception and understanding of the visual information of the museum 
exhibits. To achieve the aims of this study, the cross-modal interaction approach of 
HAID was adopted. The research involved field observation, user needs analysis, a 
literature review and pilot testing with visually impaired participants. 
 
 
The results indicated that when the participants used tactile displays without 
audio descriptions or vice versa, they found it difficult to understand the information 
presented. The visually impaired visitors generally received descriptive information 
about exhibits from their companions or from museum staff who offered guided tours 
of the museum. Some also obtained information from braille descriptions or audio 
devices. The findings of this study indicate that the ways in which visitors currently 
receive descriptive information is not complete and must include both tactile and 
audio information.  
 
 
Researching with the conceptual tactile-audio paper prototype revealed 
several findings. To be most effective, the tactile display should not be a direct 

	  
177	  
replica of the original exhibit or artwork, but a carefully simplified version with the 
right amount of visual information that is easily accessed and understood by the 
visually impaired. The touch-activated audio description should be carefully narrated 
with visual descriptions that are easily understood by the visually impaired and 
complement the tactile display. According to the findings of this study, the cross-
modal design option is an effective and accessible interface system that allows the 
visually impaired to perceive and understand visual information and improves mental 
imagery construction for museum visitors. 
 
 
Access to detailed information about museum exhibits is crucial for visually 
impaired visitors to construct mental images of the exhibits and feel that their 
museum experience is worthwhile. The concept of creating a barrier-free and 
accessible museum environment for visually impaired visitors should be redefined to 
include not only an accessible physical environment, but also accessible exhibit 
information and content. Using the cross-modal interaction approach to create a 
HAID platform that provides multisensory feedback for visually impaired visitors has 
great potential to help the visually impaired construct such mental images. An 
effective HAID platform would also improve social inclusion. When developing the 
HAID platform, there should be a strong focus on the user’s point of view, and the 
result should be a simple, easy-to-access and more humane interaction solution. 
 

	  
178	  
6.3  
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
 
This study provided valuable insights into museum environments in Hong Kong and 
an in-depth understanding of HAID and the adopted cross-modal interaction design 
approach. It also revealed the interactivity characteristics of the visually impaired 
through a series of case studies and interviews. The insights gleaned from this study 
should contribute to user-interface planning and development in addition to social 
inclusiveness and communication. This study provided opportunities to conduct field 
observations at multiple museums and interact with museum representatives. These 
experiences provided well-rounded insights into the current museum environment and 
an understanding of the mentality of museum representatives. It is important to 
acknowledge and discuss some of the limitations that were encountered throughout 
this study. Hopefully, these experiences can prove useful for future research. The 
following is a list of some of the limitations encountered. 
1. Challenges with Group Interviews—the interviews with groups of visually 
impaired participants presented a challenge in terms of controlling their active 
participation and responses, especially as the interviews were conducted by 
only one interviewee without any assistants or helpers. It was common for 
more than one participant to respond and speak out at the same time. As a 
result of the overlapping responses, some of the responses could not be 
recorded clearly. One-to-one interviews and the pilot studies were conducted 

	  
179	  
to overcome the aforementioned issues. This resulted in a much longer 
research time than expected.  
 
2. ‘No Photo and No Video’ Policy—making field observations under the ‘No 
Photo and No Video’ policy within the museums or exhibition halls presented 
another challenge. Only limited photographs could be taken for the field 
observations of the museums included in this study. Audio notes and sketches 
were time consuming and unreliable in some ways. Therefore, in some cases, 
telephone call surveys to museum hotlines followed by field visits (conducted 
to crosscheck the collected information) were used to overcome such 
limitations and not conflict with museum policy. 
 
3. Tactile Display and Audio Description References and Prototype Making—
the inconsistent formatting of tactile display and audio descriptions was an 
issue for the user-experience analysis and pilot studies. Therefore, reproduced 
references were required to create more unified and consistent prototypes for 
the pilot testing exercise. A limited supply of the required materials, the cost 
of the materials and the machine used to reproduce these references were 
other limitations encountered throughout this study.   
 

	  
180	  
4. Multidisciplinary and Multitasking Role—due to the multidisciplinary nature 
of this study and given that multiple roles were required, it was very 
challenging to stay focused on all aspects. Attention was focused on the 
research activities and conceptual prototype making instead of the academic 
writing and research paper publication. It was a challenge to strike a balance 
across all of the aspects. The experiences from the research activities and 
prototype making had a strong effect on the outcomes of this study and on the 
thoughts and ideas for possible future work inspired by this study. 
 
6.4  
POSSIBLE FUTURE WORKS 
 
In this section, potential future works inspired by this study are discussed and 
presented. Several opportunities are explored that could allow for more research 
related to this study, with the aim of creating a more accessible and inclusive 
environment for visually impaired and blind individuals.  
 
 
The conceptual tactile-audio paper prototypes experiment showcased the 
effectiveness of the cross-modal interaction system and concluded that the HAID 
platform was suitable for implementation in rich visual-oriented environments. A 
future work should include the creation of a HAID exhibition in a real-life museum or 
gallery setting by converting a series of two- and three-dimensional masterpieces 

	  
181	  
using the cross-modal interaction approach. This would allow for the further 
observation and investigation of user feedback in real-life environments. This 
exhibition could also be used to support the idea of setting up a social enterprise or a 
non-profit organisation that focuses on improving accessibility for the visually 
impaired in museum environments using the tools discussed in this study. More ideas 
about possible future work related to this study are presented as follows.	  
1. This thesis should be summarised to make it more accessible and inclusive 
and align it with the fundamental idea of this study. One idea is to abstract all 
of the crucial points and insights from the study in point form with diagrams. 
This would allow for an easy-to-read version of this document and allow 
anyone in a related field or profession or students to refer to this study as a 
guide or reference. 
2. This thesis should be converted into a unified braille version with a 
compatible audio book to allow any visually impaired or blind individual to 
access it easily. This would also allow them to give further feedback or 
continue the discussion related to the topic. 
3. Tactile materials and audio technologies that are more affordable to build 
should be explored. This would decrease costing concerns or budgetary issues 
for museums or heritage sites. Hopefully, these organisations will opt for 
accessible options for the visually impaired and blind. 

	  
182	  
4. The possibility of developing an international unified tactile-audio interaction 
system code or guidelines should be explored. This would maximise 
accessibility of different venues for the visually impaired. It would also be a 
way to improve inclusiveness in learning and social activities. In addition, it 
would offer more opportunities to share materials and resources. 
5. A social enterprise that provides HAID services to museums, heritage sites or 
other art and cultural venues should be established. These services would help 
to improve the accessible facilities or programmes of these organisations and 
create 
more 
inclusive 
environments. 
Ultimately, 
a 
tactile 
diagram/display/drawing and audio description databank (like a photo or 
image bank) could be created and serve as an open-access resource hub and 
platform for visually impaired individuals and education-related institutions 
and libraries while offering services to the commercial sector when help in 
this area is needed.  
6. The possibility of applying ‘touch-activated sound’ or the cross-modal 
interaction approach to three-dimensional printed objects should be explored. 
How current three-dimensional printing methods can be used to avoid the 
problem of direct replication, as mentioned in the ‘Literature Review’ and 
‘Critical Discussion and Analysis’ chapters, should also be explored. This 
project outcome could also benefit individuals with learning difficulties or 
autism, another large area of research. 

	  
183	  
7. One of the findings obtained through the interviews with visually impaired 
participants revealed that there are limited job options for the visually 
impaired community. This situation directly affects their ability to be 
financially secure and therefore affects their quality of life. One idea inspired 
by this study was to collaborate with blind schools or vocational education 
institutions to provide intensive training or workshops on tactile displays or 
tactile diagram making, audio description production and product 
development in relation to HAID.  
 
This thesis should inspire potential future work in many areas, especially in 
museum environments, heritage sites and educational institutions. The proposed 
cross-modal interaction approach should be further developed to help provide more 
equal and accessible environments for disadvantaged groups in society. This 
approach could be used in high- or low-tech environments and could be very affective 
in providing accessible options for individuals with special needs.   

	  
184	  
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX 1: 
An overview of the facilities for visually impaired or blind visitors in the 11 Hong 
Kong museums managed by the Leisure and Cultural Services Department (LCSD). 
	  
Museums	  
in	  	  
Hong	  
Kong	  
Tactile	  
Guide	  
Paths	  
Tactile	  
Map	  
Braille	  
Descriptions	  
for	  Exhibits	  
Audio	  
Kits	  
Tactile	  
Imagery	  
Guided	  Tour	  
Visually	  
Impaired	  
Workshop	  
	  
Hong	  
Kong	  
Museum	  
of	  Art	  
Entrance	  of	  
the	  
museum	  
only,	  not	  in	  
the	  
exhibition	  
hall	  
	  
	  
YES	  
	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  
regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(guides	  are	  
not	  trained	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Hong	  
Kong	  
Heritage	  
Museum	  
Entrance	  of	  
the	  
museum	  
and	  
information	  
counter	  
only,	  not	  in	  
the	  
exhibition	  
hall	  
	  
	  
YES	  
YES	  
(on	  limited	  
exhibits	  
only,	  
leaflets	  and	  
booklets)	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(guides	  are	  
not	  trained	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Hong	  
Kong	  	  
Science	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Hong	  
Kong	  
Museum	  
of	  History	  
Entrance	  of	  
the	  
museum	  
and	  
information	  
counter	  
only,	  not	  in	  
the	  
exhibition	  
hall	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  
regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(Guides	  are	  
not	  trained	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
	  
NO	  

	  
185	  
	  
Hong	  
Kong	  	  
Space	  
Museum	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
YES	  
(for	  
regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
	  
NO	  
	  
	  
NO	  
Hong	  
Kong	  
Museum	  
of	  Coastal	  
Defense	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Law	  Uk	  
Folk	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(guides	  are	  
not	  trained	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people)	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Dr	  Sun	  
Yat-­‐sen	  
Museum	  
(Hong	  
Kong)	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(for	  
regular	  
visitors	  
only)	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(guides	  are	  
not	  train	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Hong	  
Kong	  
Railway	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(guides	  are	  
not	  trained	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Lei	  Cheng	  
Uk	  Han	  
Tomb	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
Sam	  Tung	  
Uk	  
Museum	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
	  
NO	  
YES	  
(guides	  are	  
not	  trained	  to	  
facilitate	  
visually	  
impaired/blind	  
people	  
	  
NO	  

	  
186	  
 
APPENDIX 2: 
All questions for the interviews and pilot study are based on the ‘tactile imagery 
guiding principles’ proposed by Fuller and Watkins (2010).	  
	  
An	   inclusive	   and	   holistic	   approach	   to	   guide	   the	   museum	   staff,	   exhibit	   curators,	  
designers	  and	  fabricators	  through	  the	  process	  is	  highly	  recommended.	  The	  following	  
useful	   guiding	   principles	   for	   approaching	   the	   use	   of	   tactile	   exhibits	   have	   been	  
developed.	  
	  
Guiding	  Principles:	  
1. Increase	   awareness,	   knowledge	   or	   understanding	   of	   a	   particular	   topic,	  
concept,	  phenomenon	  or	  theory;	  
2. Increase	  engagement	  or	  interest	  in	  the	  theme(s)	  of	  the	  exhibit;	  	  
3. Change	  attitudes	  about	  a	  particular	  topic,	  concept,	  phenomenon	  or	  theory;	  
4. Change	  behaviour	  towards	  an	  exhibit	  topic;	  and	  
5. Increase	  perceptual,	  observational	  and	  interpretive	  skills	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  
exhibit	  experience.	  
	  
Tactile	  exhibit	  elements	  should	  be	  aligned	  with	  the	  principles	  of	  universal	  design	  as	  
follows.	  The	  exhibit	  must:	  
1. Be	  useful	  for	  people	  with	  diverse	  abilities;	  
2. Accommodate	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  preferences	  and	  abilities;	  
3. Be	  simple	  and	  intuitive	  to	  use;	  
4. Provide	   the	   added	   dimension	   of	   communicating	   perceptual	   information	  
regardless	  of	  the	  ambient	  conditions	  or	  the	  user’s	  sensory	  abilities;	  
5. Have	  no	  moving	  parts	  that	  are	  hazardous	  to	  use;	  
6. Require	  a	  minimum	  of	  effort	  to	  use;	  and	  
7. Exemplify	  a	  design	  that	  accommodates	  an	  easy	  approach	  and	  can	  be	  used	  
regardless	  of	  the	  user’s	  body	  size,	  posture	  or	  visual	  acuity.	  

	  
187	  
 
APPENDIX 3: 
An overview of the ‘elements of visual image interpretation principles’ proposed by 
Lillesand and Kiefer (1994) as a fundamental guide is given as follows. 
Elements	  of	  Visual	  Image	  Interpretation	  (Lillesand	  &	  Kiefer,	  1994)	  –	  although	  most	  
individuals	  have	  had	  substantial	  experience	  in	  interpreting	  conventional	  
photographs	  in	  their	  daily	  lives	  (e.g.,	  newspaper	  photographs),	  the	  interpretation	  of	  
images	  often	  departs	  from	  everyday	  photo	  interpretation	  in	  three	  important	  ways:	  
(1)	  the	  portrayal	  of	  features	  from	  an	  overhead,	  often	  unfamiliar,	  perspective;	  (2)	  the	  
frequent	  use	  of	  wavelengths	  outside	  of	  the	  visible	  portion	  of	  the	  spectrum;	  and	  (3)	  
the	  depiction	  of	  the	  earth’s	  surface	  at	  unfamiliar	  scales	  and	  resolutions.	  Although	  
these	  factors	  may	  be	  insignificant	  to	  the	  experienced	  image	  interpreter,	  they	  can	  
represent	  a	  substantial	  challenge	  to	  the	  novice	  image	  analyst.	  A	  systematic	  study	  of	  
aerial	  photographs	  usually	  involves	  several	  basic	  characteristics	  of	  features	  shown	  
on	  a	  photograph.	  The	  exact	  characteristics	  useful	  for	  any	  specific	  task	  and	  the	  
manner	  in	  which	  they	  are	  considered	  depend	  on	  the	  field	  of	  application.	  However,	  
most	  applications	  consider	  the	  following	  basic	  characteristics,	  or	  variations	  of	  them:	  
shape,	  size,	  pattern,	  tone	  (or	  hue),	  texture,	  shadows,	  site	  and	  association.	  
Shape	  refers	  to	  the	  general	  form,	  configuration	  or	  outline	  of	  individual	  objects.	  In	  
the	  case	  of	  stereoscopic	  photographs,	  the	  object’s	  height	  also	  defines	  its	  shape.	  The	  
shape	  of	  some	  objects	  is	  so	  distinctive	  that	  their	  images	  may	  be	  identified	  solely	  
from	  this	  criterion.	  The	  Pentagon	  Building	  near	  Washington,	  DC,	  is	  a	  classic	  example.	  
All	  shapes	  are	  obviously	  not	  this	  diagnostic,	  but	  every	  shape	  is	  of	  some	  significance	  
to	  the	  photo	  interpreter.	  
Size	  of	  objects	  on	  photographs	  must	  be	  considered	  in	  the	  context	  of	  the	  photo	  scale.	  
A	  small	  storage	  shed,	  for	  example,	  may	  be	  misinterpreted	  as	  a	  barn	  if	  size	  is	  not	  

	  
188	  
considered.	  The	  relative	  sizes	  of	  objects	  in	  photographs	  of	  the	  same	  scale	  must	  also	  
be	  considered.	  
Pattern	  relates	  to	  the	  spatial	  arrangement	  of	  objects.	  The	  repetition	  of	  certain	  
general	  forms	  or	  relationships	  is	  characteristic	  of	  many	  objects,	  both	  natural	  and	  
constructed,	  and	  gives	  objects	  a	  pattern	  that	  aids	  the	  photo	  interpreter	  in	  
recognising	  them.	  An	  outdoor	  drive-­‐in	  theatre,	  for	  example,	  has	  a	  particular	  layout	  
and	  pattern	  of	  parking	  spaces	  that	  aid	  in	  its	  identification.	  Drive-­‐in	  theatres	  have	  
been	  misidentified	  as	  housing	  subdivisions	  by	  novice	  photo	  interpreters	  who	  did	  not	  
carefully	  consider	  size,	  shape	  and	  pattern.	  Likewise,	  the	  ordered	  spatial	  
arrangement	  of	  trees	  in	  an	  orchard	  is	  in	  distinct	  contrast	  to	  that	  of	  forest	  tree	  
stands.	  
Tone	  refers	  to	  the	  relative	  brightness	  or	  colour	  of	  objects	  on	  photographs.	  Without	  
tonal	  differences,	  the	  shapes,	  patterns	  and	  textures	  of	  objects	  may	  not	  be	  
discerned.	  Colour	  photography	  enables	  an	  interpreter	  to	  exploit	  differences	  in	  hue.	  
Texture	  is	  the	  frequency	  of	  tonal	  change	  on	  the	  photographic	  image.	  Texture	  is	  
produced	  by	  an	  aggregation	  of	  unit	  features	  that	  may	  be	  too	  small	  to	  discern	  
individually	  on	  a	  photograph,	  such	  as	  tree	  leaves	  and	  leaf	  shadows.	  It	  is	  a	  product	  of	  
their	  individual	  shape,	  size,	  pattern,	  shadow	  and	  tone.	  It	  determines	  the	  overall	  
visual	  smoothness	  or	  coarseness	  of	  image	  features.	  As	  the	  scale	  of	  the	  photograph	  is	  
reduced,	  the	  texture	  of	  any	  given	  object	  or	  area	  becomes	  progressively	  finer	  and	  
ultimately	  disappears.	  An	  interpreter	  can	  often	  distinguish	  between	  features	  with	  
similar	  reflectances	  based	  on	  their	  texture	  differences.	  An	  example	  is	  the	  smooth	  
texture	  of	  green	  grass	  as	  contrasted	  with	  the	  rough	  texture	  of	  green	  tree	  crowns	  on	  
medium-­‐scale	  air	  photos.	  

	  
189	  
Shadows	  are	  important	  to	  interpreters	  for	  two	  opposing	  reasons:	  (1)	  the	  shape	  or	  
outline	  of	  a	  shadow	  affords	  an	  impression	  of	  the	  profile	  view	  of	  objects	  (which	  aids	  
interpretation)	  and	  (2)	  objects	  within	  shadows	  reflect	  little	  light	  and	  are	  difficult	  to	  
discern	  on	  photographs	  (which	  hinders	  interpretation).	  For	  example,	  the	  shadows	  
cast	  by	  various	  tree	  species	  or	  cultural	  features	  (bridges,	  silos,	  towers,	  etc.)	  can	  
definitely	  aid	  with	  their	  identification	  in	  air	  photos.	  Furthermore,	  the	  shadows	  
resulting	  from	  even	  subtle	  variations	  in	  terrain	  elevations,	  especially	  in	  the	  case	  of	  
low-­‐sun-­‐angle	  photographs,	  can	  aid	  in	  assessing	  natural	  topographic	  variations	  that	  
may	  be	  diagnostic	  of	  various	  geological	  landforms.	  
Site	  refers	  to	  topographic	  or	  geographic	  location	  and	  is	  a	  particularly	  important	  aid	  
in	  the	  identification	  of	  vegetation	  types.	  For	  example,	  certain	  tree	  species	  are	  
expected	  to	  occur	  on	  well-­‐drained	  upland	  sites,	  and	  other	  tree	  species	  are	  expected	  
to	  occur	  on	  poorly	  drained	  lowland	  sites.	  Furthermore,	  various	  tree	  species	  occur	  
only	  in	  certain	  geographic	  areas	  (e.g.,	  redwoods	  occur	  in	  California,	  but	  not	  in	  
Indiana).	  
Association	  refers	  to	  the	  occurrence	  of	  certain	  features	  in	  relation	  to	  others.	  For	  
example,	  a	  Ferris	  wheel	  may	  be	  difficult	  to	  identify	  if	  it	  is	  standing	  in	  a	  field	  near	  a	  
barn,	  but	  easy	  to	  identify	  if	  it	  is	  in	  an	  area	  recognised	  as	  an	  amusement	  park. 

	  
190	  
 
REFERENCES 
 
Aleman, A., van Lee, L., Mantione, M., Verkoijnen, I., & de Haan, E. (2001). Visual 
imagery without visual experiences: Evidence from congenitally totally blind people. 
NeuroReport, 12(11), 2601–2604. 
 
Al-Saji, A. (2010). Bodies and sensings: On the uses of Husserlian phenomenology 
for feminist theory. Continental Philosophy Review, 43(1), 13–37. 
 
Amedi, A., Raz, N., Pianka, P., Malach, R., & Zohary, E. (2003). Early ‘visual’ 
cortex activation correlates with superior verbal memory performance in the blind. 
Nature Neuroscience, 6(7), 758–766. 
 
Amemiya, T., & Sugiyama, H. (2008). Design of a haptic direction indicator for 
visually impaired people in emergency situations. Computer Science, 5105, 1141–
1144. 
 
American Foundation for the Blind (1972). Nature trails, braille trails, footpaths, 
fragrance gardens, touch museums for the blind: Policy statement. New York: 
American Foundation for the Blind, Inc.  
 
Argyle, M., Lalljee, M., & Cook, M. (1968). The effects of visibility on interaction in 
a dyad. Human Relations, 21(1), 3–17. 
 
Arts Council of England (2008). Building inclusion physical access guidance for the 
arts. London: Author. 
 

	  
191	  
Axel, E. S., & Levent, N. S. (Eds.). (2003). Art beyond sight: A resource guide to art, 
creativity, and visual impairment. New York: AFB Press. 
 
Baklen, R., & Bogdan, S. (1982). Qualitative research for education: An introduction 
to theory and methods. Allyn and Bacon, Boston. 
 
Barraga, N. C. (1973). Utilization of sensory-perceptual ability. In: B. Lowenfeld 
(Ed.), The visually handicapped child in school, 117–154. New York: John Day Co. 
 
Barraga, N. C. (1983). Visual handicaps and learning. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, Inc. 
 
Barraga, N.C. (1986). Sensory perceptual development. In: G.T. Scholl (Ed.), 
Foundations of education for blind and visually handicapped children and youth: 
Theory and practice, pp. 83–98. New York: American Foundation for the Blind. 
 
Barry, L. (2013). Authority and the museum: A framework of questions. 
International Journal of the Inclusive Museum, 6(1)  
 
Bates, K. (1998). A social history of blindness, Loughborough University. PhD 
thesis.  
 
Baurley, S. (2011). The role of design in facilitating multi-disciplinary collaboration 
in wearable technology. In: Westerink et al. (Eds.), Philips research book series: Vol. 
12. Sensing emotions, pp. 181–195. The Netherlands: Springer. 
 
Baxter, S., & Jack, S. (2008). Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and 
implementation for novice researchers. The Qualitative Report, 13(4), 544–559. 
 

	  
192	  
Becatoros, E. (2004). Tactile museum helps the blind discover birthplace of ancient 
Olympics. AP Worldstream. 
 
Bértolo, H. (2005). Visual imagery without visual perception? Psicológica, 26, 173–
188. 
 
Bourdieu, P. (1990). Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste. London: 
Routledge. 
 
Bourdieu, P. (1991). The love of art. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
 
Brewster, S. A., Chohan, F., & Brown, L. M. (2007). Tactile feedback for mobile 
interactions. In: Proceedings of ACM CHI 2007, San Jose, CA, USA, pp. 159–162. 
New York: ACM Press Addison-Wesley. 
 
Brock, A., Lebaz, S., & Oriola, B. (2012). Kin’ touch: Understanding how visually 
impaired people explore tactile maps. CHI’12, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA. 
 
Brown, L. M., Brewster, S. A., & Purchase, H. C. (2006). Multidimensional tactons 
for non-visual information display in mobile devices. New York: ACM Press, 231–
238. 
 
Busse, L., Roberts, K. C., Crist, R. E., Weissman, D. H., Woldorff, M. G. (2005). The 
spread of attention across modalities and space in a multisensory object. PNAS 
102(51), 18751–18756. 
 
Buyurgan, S. (2009). The expectations of the visually impaired university students 
from museums. Educational Sciences: Theory & Practice, 9(3), 1191–1204. 

	  
193	  
 
Callon, M. (1984). Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of the 
scallops and the fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. The Sociological Review, 32(S1), 196-
233. 
 
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and quasi-experimental 
designs for research on teaching. In: N. L. Gage (Ed.), Handbook of research on 
teaching. Chicago: Rand McNally. 
 
Candlin, F. (2003). Blindness, art and exclusion in museums and galleries. 
International Journal of Art & Design Education, 22(1), 100–110. 
 
Candlin, F. (2004). Don’t touch! Hands off! Art, blindness and the conservation of 
expertise. Body & Society, 10(1), 71–90. 
 
Candlin, F. (2009). Art, museums and touch. Manchester University Press. 
 
Chan, M. K., & Siu, K. W. M. (2013). Inclusivity: A study of Hong Kong museum 
environments. International Journal of Critical Cultural Studies, 11(1), 45–61. 
 
Charles, C. M. (1988). Introduction to educational research. New York: Longman 
Publishing Company. 
 
Chatterjee, H. (Ed.). (2008). Touch in museums: Policy and practice in object 
handling. Oxford: Berg.  
 
Chen, W. (2008). Hong Kong cultural policies, Vol. 1. Hong Kong: Hua Chien Hsu 
Publications. 
 

	  
194	  
Chiu, S. (2008). Five partial recollections of Hong Kong Museum of Art 1989–1993. 
Hong Kong art: Open dialogue: Exhibition series 2008-09, a launching publication, 
pp. 60–66. 
 
Chu, C. (2008). Scattered memories: A museum story. Hong Kong art: Open 
dialogue: Exhibition series 2008-09, a launching publication, pp. 40–55. 
 
Chumkamon, S., Tuvaphanthaphiphat, P., & Keeratiwintakorn, P. (2008). A blind 
navigation system using RFID for indoor environments. In: 5th International 
Conference on In Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications 
and Information Technology, Thailand, Vol. 2, pp. 765–768. 
 
Classen, C. (2005). Touch in the museum. In: C. Classen (Ed.), The book of touch, 
pp. 275–286. Oxford: Berg. 
 
Classen, C. (2012). The deepest sense: A cultural history of touch. University of 
Illinois Press. 
 
Classen, C., & Howes, D. (2006). The museum as sensescape: Western sensibilities 
and indigenous artifacts. In: E. Edwards, C. Gosden and R. Phillips (Eds.), Sensible 
objects: Colonialism, museums and material culture, pp. 199–222. Oxford: Berg. 
 
Coates, D. C. (2003). Social order and the construction of meaning in social 
interaction: Troubled communication between sighted and partially sighted/blind 
people. Unpublished dissertation, Wayne State University, Detroit. Paper 
AAI3116487. Retrieved 10 May 2012 from: 
http://digitalcommons.wayne.edu/dissertations/AAI3116487 
 

	  
195	  
Cohen, L., & Manion, L. (1980). Research methods in education. London: Croom 
Helm Ltd. 
 
Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design and analysis 
issues for field settings. Chicago: Rand-McNally. 
 
Coon, N. (1953). The place of the museum in the education of the blind (No. 6). 
American Foundation for the Blind. 
 
Creswell, J. W. (1994). Research design: Qualitative and quantitative approaches. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Creswell, J. (1998). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods 
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Cornelius, G., & Casler, J. (1991). Enhancing creativity in young children: Strategies 
for teachers. Early Child Development and Care, 72(1), 99–106. 
 
Coroama, V. (2006). Experiences from the design of a ubiquitous computing system 
for the blind. In: Extended abstracts of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp. 664–669. New York: ACM Press. 
 
Coroama, V., & Rothenbacher, F. (2003). The chatty environment – Providing 
everyday independence to the visually impaired. Seattle, WA: UbiHealth Workshop. 
 
Cranny-Francis, A. (2011). The art of touch: A photo-essay. Social Semiotics, 21(4), 
591–608. 
 

	  
196	  
Dalby, T., & Plambeck, M. (2009). The Haptic Guide. Retrieved on 30 May 2013 
from: http://www.hapticguide.com 
 
Dastur, F. (1993). Heidegger. In: D. Folscheid (Ed.), La Philosophie Allemande: De 
Kant à Heidegger, pp. 293–331. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
 
D’Atri, E., Medaglia, C. M., Serbanati, A., Ceipidor, U. B., Panizzi, E., & D’Atri, A. 
(2007). A system to aid blind people in the mobility: A usability test and its results. 
IEEE, pp. 35–40. 
 
Denzin, N. K. (1970). The research act: A theoretical introduction to sociological 
methods. Chicago, IL: Aldine Inc. 
  
Dodd, J., & Sandell, R. (1998). Building bridges. Guidance for museums and 
galleries on developing new audiences. London: Museum & Galleries Commission. 
 
Dodd, J., Sandell, R., Jolly, D., & Jones, C. (2008). Rethinking disability 
representation in museums and galleries. Leicester, England: RCMG, Leicester 
University Press. 
 
Dodd, J., & Sandell, R. (2010). Including museums: Perspectives on museums, 
galleries and social inclusion. Leicester, England: RCMG, Leicester University 
Press. 
 
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the action is: The foundations of embodied interaction. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 

	  
197	  
Driver, J., & Spence, C. (1998). Attention and the crossmodal construction of 
space. Trends in cognitive sciences, 2(7), 254-262. 
 
 
Eisner, E. W. (1991). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and the enhancement 
of educational practice. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 
 
Eleni, F., Efstratios, P., Panagistis, G. P., & Myrsini, P. (2011). Research methods for 
online research on disability. International Journal of Management, Marketing and 
Technology, 1(1), 39–46. 
 
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (1995). Writing ethnographic field notes. 
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. 
 
Fritz, J. P., & Barner, K. E. (1997). Design of a haptic data visualization system for 
people with visual impairments. IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering, 7, 
372–384. 
 
Gallace, A., & Spence, C. (2008). A memory for touch: The cognitive science of 
tactile memory. In: H. Chatterjee (Ed.), Touch in museums: Policy and practice in 
object handling, pp. 163–186. Oxford: Berg. 
 
Gallace, A. (2012). Living with touch: Understanding tactile interactions. The 
Psychologist, 25, 3–5. 
 
Geisbusch, J. (2012). For your eyes only? The magic touch of relics. In: S. H. Dudley 
(Ed.), Museum objects: Experiencing the properties of things, p. 202–213. London: 
Routledge. 

	  
198	  
 
Ghiani, G., Leporini, B., & Paterno, F. (2008). Tactile feedback to aid blind users of 
mobile guides. New York: ACM Press. 
 
Ghiani, G., Leporini, B., & Paterno, F. (2009). Vibrotactile feedback as an orientation 
aid for blind users of mobile guides. Journal of Visual languages and Computing, 
20(5), 305–317. 
 
Gibson, J. J. (1962). Observations on active touch. Psychological Review, 69(3), 477–
491. 
 
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin Co. 
 
Gibson, J. J. (1972). A theory of direct visual perception. In: J. R. Royce and W. W. 
Rozeboom (Eds.), The psychology of knowing, pp. 233–236. New York: Gordon & 
Breach. 
 
Goldreich, D., & Kanics, I. M. (2003). Tactile acuity is enhanced in blindness. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 3439–3445.  
 
Goldsmith, S. (1997). Designing for the disabled: The new paradigm. Oxford: 
Architectural Press. 
 
Goode, D. (1994). A world without words: The social construction of children born 
deaf and blind. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
 

	  
199	  
Goodley, D., & Moore, M. (2000). Doing disability research: Activist lives and the 
academy. Disability and Society, 15(6), 861–882. 
 
Gougoux, F., Lepore, F., Lassonde, M., Voss, P., Zatorre, R. J., & Belin, P. (2004). 
Neuropsychology: Pitch discrimination in the early blind. Nature, 430, 309. 
 
Gougoux, F., Zatorre, R. J., Lassonde, M., Voss, P., & Lepore, F. (2005). A 
functional neuroimaging study of sound localization: Visual cortex activity predicts 
performance in early-blind individuals. PLoS Biology, 3(2), 27. 
 
Gray, C., & Malins, J. (2004). Visualizing research: A guide to the research process 
in art and design. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.  
 
Gregory, R. L. (1970). The intelligent eye. London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson. 
 
Guba, E. (1981). Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic inquiries. 
Educational Resources Information Center Annual Review Paper. 29, 75–91. 
 
Gumtau, S. (2005). Communication and interaction using touch: Examine the user 
before you reproduce his hand! In: Human-Centred Technology Postgraduate 
Workshop '05. 
 
Haans, A., & Ijsselsteijn, W. (2005). Mediated social touch: A review of current 
research and future directions. London: Springer-Verlag. 
 
Hakim, C. (1987). Research design: Strategies and choices in the design of social 
research. London: Allen and Unwin. 
 

	  
200	  
Harper, D. (2002). Talking about pictures: A case for photo elicitation. Visual 
Studies, 17(1), 13–26.  
 
Hartley, S., & Muhit, M. (2003). Using qualitative research methods for disability 
research in majority world countries. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 
14(2), 103–114. 
 
Hatwell, Y., Streri, A., & Gentaz, E. (Eds.). (2003). Touching for knowing: Cognitive 
psychology of haptic manual perception (Vol. 53). Amsterdam: John Benjamins 
Publishing. 
 
Heath, C., & vom Lehn, D. (2004). Configuring reception: (Dis-)regarding the 
‘spectator’ in museums and galleries. Theory, Culture and Society, 21(6), 43–65. 
 
Heath, C., & vom Lehn, D. (in press). Revealing surprise: The local ecology and the 
transposition of action. In: A. Peräkylä and Marja-Leena Sorjonen (Eds.), Emotion in 
Interaction, pp. 211–233. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Heller, M. A. (2003). Haptic perceptual illusions. In: Y. Hatwell, A. Streri and E. 
Gentaz (Eds.), Touching for knowing, pp. 161–171. Amsterdam: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company. 
 
Heller, M. A., & Schiff, W. (1991). The psychology of touch. Hillsdale, NJ: L. 
Erlbaum. 
 
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. New York: Harper Collins. 
 

	  
201	  
Hemmert, F. (2011). Embodied interactions: In touch with the digital. Interaction 
Conference IXDA. Dublin: Island. 
 
Hetherington, K. (2000). Museums and the visually impaired: The spatial politics of 
access. The Sociological Review, 48(3), 444–463. 
 
Hoggan, E., & Brewster, S. (Eds.). (2007). Designing audio and tactile crossmodal 
icons for mobile devices. The 9th International Conference on Multimodal interface, 
pp. 162–169. New York: ACM Press. 
 
Holeman, H. R. (1993). Qualitative enquiry in medical research. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology, 46, 29–36. 
 
Hong Kong Blind Union. (2012). Statistics on People with Visual Impairment Report. 
Retrieved 28 May 2012 from: http://www.hkbu.org.hk/en_about.php 
 
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (1991). Museum and gallery education. Leicester, England: 
Leicester University Press. 
 
Hull, T., & Mason, H. (1995). Performance of blind children on digit span tests. 
Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 89(2), 166–169. 
 
Husserl, E. (1936). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental 
phenomenology. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
 
Ilharco, F. (2002). Information technology as ontology. London: London School of 
Economics. 
 

	  
202	  
Ishii, H., Kobayashi, M., & Arita, K. (1994). Iterative design of seamless 
collaboration media, Communications of the ACM, 37(8), 83–97. 
 
Ishii, H., & Ullmer, B. (1997, March). Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces 
between people, bit and atoms. In Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on 
Human factors in computing system (pp. 234-241) AMC 
 
Jacob, R., Shalaik, B., Winstanley, C., & Mooney, P. (2011). Haptic feedback for 
passengers using public transport. Berlin: Springer. 
 
Jansson, G., & Juhasz, I. (2007). The reading of virtual maps without vision. Sweden: 
Uppsala University. 
 
Jefferies, J. K., Zimmer, R., & Srinivasan, M. (2008). Touch technologies and 
museum access. In: H. Chatterjee (Ed.), Touch in museums, pp. 150–162. Oxford: 
Berg. 
 
Karp, I. (2006). Museum frictions: Public cultures/global transformations. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press. 
 
Katz, D. (1925). The world of touch. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 
Katz, E. L., Lankford, E. L., & Plank, J. D. (1995). Themes and foundations of art. St. 
Paul, MN: West Publishing Co. 
 
Kennedy, J. M. (1978). Haptics. In: E. C. Carterette and M. P. Friedman (Eds.), 
Handbook of perception, pp. 289–318. New York: Academic Press. 
 

	  
203	  
Kleege, G. (1999). Sight unseen. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 
Kosslyn, S. M. (1996). Image and brain: The resolution of the imagery debate. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 
Kusayama, K. (2005). Access to museums for visually challenged people in Japan 
International Congress Series, 1282(September), 877–880. 
 
Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews: An introduction to qualitative research interviewing. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Kwon, D. S. (2007). Will haptics technology be used in mobile devices?: A historical 
review of haptics technology and its potential applications in multi-modal interfaces. 
In: Haptic and audio interaction design, pp. 9–10. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. 
 
 
Larsen, J., & Svabo, C. (2014). The tourist gaze and ‘Family Treasure Trails’ in 
museums. Tourist Studies, 14(2), 105–125. 
 
Lather, P. (1992). Critical frames in educational research: Feminist and post-
structural perspectives. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 87–99. 
 
Lederman S. J. (1982). The perception of texture by touch. In: W. Schiff and E. 
Foulke (Eds.), Tactual perception: A sourcebook. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. A. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
 

	  
204	  
List, A., Iordanescu, L., Grabowecky, M., & Suzuki, S. (2012). Haptic shape guides 
visual search. Journal of Vision, 12(9), 1320–1320. 
 
Lillesand, T. M., & Kiefer, R. W. (1994). Remote sensing and photo 
interpretation. John Wiley and Sons: New York, 750. 
 
Lotzkar, M., & Bottorff, J. (2001). An observational study of the development of a 
nursepatient relationship. Clinical Nursing Research, 10, 275–294. 
 
Loomis, J. L., & Lederman, S. I. (1986). Tactual perception. Handbook of perception 
and Human Performance, 2, 1–41. 
 
Lowenfeld, V. (1957). Creative and mental growth (3rd ed.). New York: Macmillan 
Publishing Co., Inc. 
 
Lowenfeld, V., & Brittain W. L. (1975). Creative and mental growth (6th ed.). New 
York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc. 
 
Lowenfeld, B. (1981). Berthold Lowenfeld on blindness and blind people. New York: 
American Foundation for the Blind, Inc. 
 
Lyotard, J. F. (1992). La phénoménologie. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
 
MacDonald, S. (2007). Exploring the role of touch in connoisseurship and the 
identification of objects. In: E. Pye (Ed.), The power of touch: Handling objects in 
museum and heritage contexts, pp. 107–120. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.  
 
Man, E. K. W. (1996). Experimental painting and painting theories in colonial Hong 
Kong (1940-1980): Reflections on cultural identity. Filozofski vestnik, 17(2), 83–105. 

	  
205	  
 
Man, E. K. W. (2011). A museum of hybridity: The history of the display of art in the 
Public Museum of Hong Kong, and its implications for cultural identities. Visual 
Anthropology, 24(1-2), 90–105. 
 
Markiewicz, M., & Skomorowski, M. (2010). Public transport information system for 
visually impaired and blind people. Berlin: Springer. 
 
Mata, F., & Jaramillo, A. (2011). A mobile navigation and orientation system for 
blind users in a metrobus environment. Berlin: Springer. 
 
McAdams, S., Chaigne, A., & Roussarie, V. (2004). The psychomechanics of 
simulated sound sources: Material properties of impacted bars. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 115(3), 1306–1320. 
 
McDaniel, T., Krishna, S., Balasubramanian, V., Colbry, D., & Panchanathan, S. 
(2008). Using a haptic belt to convey non-verbal communication cues during social 
interactions to individuals who are blind. In: Haptic Audio Visual Environments and 
Games, 2008. HAVE 2008. IEEE International Workshop on (pp. 13-18). IEEE. 
 
McGookin, D. K., & Brewster, S. A. (2006). MultiVis: Improving access to 
visualisations for visually impaired people. In: CHI ‘06 extended abstracts on human 
factors in computing systems, pp. 267–270. New York: ACM Press. 
 
McLinden, M. T., & McCall, S. (2002). Learning through touch: Supporting children 
with visual impairment and additional difficulties. London: David Fulton. 
 

	  
206	  
Miao, M., Kohlmann, W., Schiewe, M., & Weber, G. (2009). Tactile paper 
prototyping with blind subjects. In: M. Ercan Altinsoy, U. Jekosch and S. Brewster 
(Eds.), Haptic and audio interaction design, Vol. 5763, pp 81–90. Springer: Berlin. 
 
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case study research in education: A qualitative approach. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
 
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
 
Messham-Muir, K. (2005). Affect, interpretation and technology. Open Museum 
Journal, 7, 11. 
 
Michael, J. A. (1983). Art and adolescence: Teaching art at the secondary level. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 
 
Michalko, R. (2001). The mystery of the eye and the shadow of blindness. Toronto, 
Canada: University of Toronto Press. 
 
Mingers, J. (2001). Embodying information systems: The contribution of 
phenomenology. Information and Organization, 11, 103–128. 
 
Mitchell, R. (1999). The research base of community-based rehabilitation. Disability 
and Rehabilitation, 21(10-11), 459–468. 
 
Monod, E., & Klein, H. K. (2005). A phenomenological evaluation framework for 
cultural heritage interpretation: From e-HS to Heidegger’s historicity. In: Proceedings 

	  
207	  
of the Eleventh Americas Conference on Information Systems, Omaha, USA, pp. 
2870–2877. 
 
Moreno, L., Gálvez, M. C., Ruiz, B., & Martínez, P. (2008). Inclusion of accessibility 
requirements in the design of electronic guides for museums. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, 5105, 1101–1108. 
 
MORI (2001). Visitors to museums and galleries in the UK. London: re:source. 
 
Niemeyer, W., & Starlinger, I. (1981). Do the blind hear better? Investigations on 
auditory processing in congenital or early acquired blindness II. Central functions. 
Audiology, 20, 510–515. 
 
Oakley, I., Kim, Y., Lee, J., & Ryu, J. (2006). Determining the feasibility of forearm 
mounted vibrotactile displays. In: Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual 
Environment and Teleoperator Systems. IEEE, 81. 
 
Oviatt, S. L. (1999). Mutual disambiguation of recognition errors in a multimodal 
architecture. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems CHI’99 (May 18–20, Pittsburgh, PA), pp. 576–583. New York: ACM Press.  
 
Pagliano, P. J. (1999). Multisensory environments. London: David Fulton.  
 
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 

	  
208	  
 
Peacock, B. (2015). The future of museum communication: Strategies for engaging 
audiences on archaeology (Doctoral dissertation, University of Southampton). 
 
Pearce, S. M. (1994). Museum objects. In: S. M. Pearce (Ed.), Interpreting objects 
and collections, pp. 9–11. London: Routledge.   
 
Pearson, A. (2003). A museum professional. In: E. S. Axel and N. S. Levent (Eds.), 
Art beyond sight: A resource guide to art, creativity, and visual impairment, p. 503. 
New York: AFB Press.   
 
Perkins Museum. (2011). Perkins School for the Blind History Museum. Retrieved 30 
March 2011 from: http://www.perkinsmuseum.org/ 
 
Peter, W. (2004). How a blind man sees: The sound of children playing and the 
splashing of rain are just as powerful as sight in experiencing the pleasures of the 
world, says Peter White. The Independent, 5. Published on: 6 April 2004. 
 
Phillips, L. (2008). Reminiscence: Recent work at the British Museum. In: H. 
Chatterjee (Ed.), Touch in museums: Policy and practice in object handling, pp. 199–
204. Oxford: Berg. 
 
Pye, E. (2008). The power of touch: Handling objects in museum and heritage 
context. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. 
 
Rahn, J. E. (1984). Ears, Hearing & Balance. Atheneum. 
 

	  
209	  
Raskin, J. (1999). Presenting Information. In: R. E. Jacobson (Ed.), Information 
design, pp. 341–348. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 
Rayner, A. (1998). Access in mind: Towards the inclusive museum. Edinburgh: Intact. 
 
Reich, C. A. (2005). Universal design of interactives for museum exhibitions 
(Unpublished master’s thesis, Lesley University). 
 
Reich, C. (2006). Universal design for computer interactives for science museum 
exhibitions. National Association for Research in Science Teaching Annual Meeting, 
San Francisco, CA. 
 
Reich, C., Lindgren-Streicher, A., Beyer, M., Levent, N., Pursley, J., & Mesiti, L. A. 
(2011). Speaking out on art and museums: Study on the needs and preferences of 
adults who are blind or have low vision. Boston, MA: Museum of Science, Boston 
and Art Beyond Sight. 
 
Reich, C. A. (2014). Taking action toward inclusion: Organizational change and the 
inclusion of people with disabilities in museum learning (Doctoral dissertation, 
Boston College). 
 
Reidmiller, L. L. (2003). Art for the visually impaired and blind: A case study of one 
artist’s solution (Doctoral dissertation, The Ohio State University). 
 
Richards, L., & Morse, J. M. (2007). Users guide for qualitative methods (2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 

	  
210	  
RNIB (2003). Museums, galleries and heritage sites: Improving access for blind and 
partially sighted people. The talking images guide. London: Author. 
 
Roder, B., Rosler, F., & Neville, H. J. (2001). Auditory memory in congenitally blind 
adults: A behavioralelectrophysiological investigation. Cognitive Brain Research, 11, 
289–303. 
 
Rodgers, P. (2005). Managing access at the museum: Disability & institutional 
boundaries.  
 
Rokem, A., & Ahissar, M. (2009). Interaction of cognitive and auditory abilities in 
congenitally blind individuals. Neurosychologia, 47(3), 834–848. 
 
Romanek, D., & Lynch, B. (2008). Touch and the value of object handling: Final 
conclusions for a new sensory museology. In: H. Chatterjee (Ed.), Touch in museums: 
Policy and practice in object handling, pp. 275–286. Oxford: Berg. 
 
Roth, P., Petrucci, L. S., Assimacopoulos, A., & Pun, T. (2000). Audio-haptic 
Internet browser and associated tools for blind and visually impaired computer users. 
Citeseer. 
 
Roulstone, A. (2007). Access and accessibility. In: International Encyclopedia of 
Rehabilitation. UK. 
 
Ruiz, B., Luis-Pajares, J., Utray, F., & Moreno, L. (2011). Design for all in 
multimedia guides for museums. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 1408–1415. 
 

	  
211	  
Ruxton, G. D., & Colegrave, N. (2006). Experimental design for the life sciences 
(2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Sapsford, R., & Jupp, V. (Eds.). (1996). Data collection and analysis. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Salgado, M., & Kellokoski, A. (2005). Äänijälki, opening dialogues for visually 
impaired inclusion in museums. In: Proc. of ‘Rethinking Technology for Museums’, 
Limerick, Ireland. 
 
Salinas, L. I. (2013). Welcoming audiences with visual impairments to the art 
museum: A study of the Meadows Museum of Art’s INsights and OUTlooks 
program. 
 
Salmen, J. S. (1998). Everyone’s welcome: The Americans with disabilities act and 
museums. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums. 
 
Shah, C., Bouzit, M., Youssef, M., & Vasquez, Y. (2006). Evaluation of RU-Netra—
Tactile feedback navigation system for the visually impaired. The International 
Workshop on Virtual Rehabilitation, 72–77. 
 
 
Siggelkow, N. (2007). Persuasion with case studies. Academy of Management 
Journal, 20–24. 
 
Siu, K. W. M. (2005). Inclusive design: Public toilets for blind persons. Conference 
paper: 2005 World Toilet Summit. World Toilet Organization. Belfast. 
 

	  
212	  
Siu, K. W. M. (2007). Accessible design: Devices for impaired persons to access 
busses. Hong Kong: The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 
 
Siu, K. W. M. (2008). Better design quality of public toilet for visually impaired 
persons: an all-round concept in design for the promotion of health. The Journal of 
the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, 128(6), 313–319. 
 
Siu, K. W. M., Lu, J., & Xu, P. (2009). Design standard of tactile guide paths in 
China: Policy, implementation and management. Conference paper: 3rd International 
Conference on Integrity, Reliability and Failure. Porto/Portugal. 
 
Smith, D. W. (2003). Phenomenology. Stanford, CT: The Stanford Encyclopaedia of 
Philosophy. 
 
Social Exclusion Unit (2003). Making the connections: Final report on transport and 
social exclusion: Summary. Social Research in Transport. London: Office of the 
Deputy Prime Minister. 
 
Spiegelberg, H. (1975). Doing phenomenology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff 
Publishers. 
 
Sportun, S. (2014). The future landscape of 3D in museums. The Multisensory 
Museum: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives on Touch, Sound, Smell, Memory, and 
Space, p. 331–340. 
 
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 

	  
213	  
Stein, B. E., & Meredith, M. A. (1993). The merging of the senses. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
 
Stone, E. (1999). Disability and development. Leeds: The Disability Press. 
 
Stone, E. (2001). A complicated struggle: Disability, survival and social change in the 
majority world. In: M. Priestley (Ed.), Disability and the life course: Global 
perspectives, pp. 50–63. 
 
Subcommittee on West Kowloon Cultural District Development. (2005). Report on 
Phase I Study by the Subcommittee on West Kowloon Cultural District Development. 
Retrieved 21 October 2011 from: http://www.legco.gov.hk/yr04-
05/english/hc/sub_com/hs02/reports/hs02cb1-rpt-e.pdf 
 
Svabo, C. (2010). Portable objects at the museum (Doctoral thesis, Roskilde 
University). 
 
Tang, H. C. (2008). Hong Kong Museum of Art: On the crossroads of curatorship. 
Hong Kong art: Open dialogue: Exhibition series 2008-09, a launching publication, 
pp. 96–99. 
 
Thomas, G. (2011). A typology for the case study in social science following a 
review of definition, discourse and structure. Qualitative Inquiry, 17(6), 511–521. 
 
Tomitsch, M., Schlogl, R., Grechenig, T., Wimmer, C., & Koltringer, T. (2008). 
Accessible real world tagging through audio-tactile location markers. Conference 
paper: Nordichi Conference, Sweden. 
 

	  
214	  
Touch. (n.d.) In Merriam-Webster’s collegiate dictionary. Retrieved on 13 December 
2011 from: 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/touch 
 
United Nations. (2005). Building peaceful social relationship by, for and with people. 
Retrieved on 30 June 2013 from: 
http://www.un.org.ezproxy.lb.polyu.edu.hk/esa/socdev/sib/peacedialogue/soc_integra
tion.htm 
 
United Nations. (2006). Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
Retrieved on 1 July 2013 from: 
http://www.un.org.ezproxy.lb.polyu.edu.hk/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.sht
ml 
 
United Nations. (2012). Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: 
Concluding observations on initial report of China, adopted by the committee at its 
eighth session (17–28 September 2012). Retrieved on 1 July 2013 from: 
http://legco.gov.hk.ezproxy.lb.polyu.edu.hk/yr12-13/english/panels/ca/papers/cacb2-
119-1-e.pdf 
 
vom Lehn, D., & Heath, C. (2005). Accounting for new technology in museum 
exhibitions. International Journal of Arts Management, 7(3), 11–21. 
 
vom Lehn, D. (2006a). Embodying experience: A video-based examination of 
visitors’ conduct and interaction in museums. European Journal of Marketing, 
40(11/12), 340–359. 
 

	  
215	  
vom Lehn, D. (2007). Knowing how to look at art. In: R. Rentschler and A.-M. Hede 
(Eds.), Museum marketing: Competing in the global marketplace, pp. 73–90. Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann. 
 
vom Lehn, D. (2010). Discovering ‘experience-ables’: Socially including visually 
impaired people in art museums. Journal of Marketing Management, 26(7–8), 749–
769. 
 
van Boven, R. W., Hamilton, R. H., Kauffman, T., Keenan, J. P., & Pascual-Leone, 
A. (2000). Tactile spatial resolution in blind braille readers. Neurology, 54, 2230–
2236.  
 
Venard, O., Baudoin, G., Uzan, G., Chart, L., & Thim, E. (2009). Field 
experimentation of the RAMPE interactive auditive information system for the 
mobility of blind people in public transport: Final evaluation. Retrieved 23 March 
2012 from: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=5399293 
 
Wagner, C., Lederman, S., & Howe, R. (2002). A tactile shape display using RC 
servomotors. In: Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator 
Systems, 2002. HAPTICS 2002. Proceedings. 10th Symposium on IEEE, Orlando, FL, 
pp. 354–355. 
 
Wall, S., & Brewster, S. (2006). Feeling what you hear: Tactile feedback for 
navigation of audio graphs. The SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems, pp. 1123–1132. New York: ACM Press. 
 
Waller, S., & Clarkson, P. J. (2009). Tools for inclusive design. In: C. Stephanidis 
(Ed.), The Universal Access Handbook, pp. 1–14. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 

	  
216	  
 
Weiser, M. (1991). The computer for the 21st century. Scientific American Special 
Issue on Communication, Computers, and Networks, September, 94–104. 
 
Welsh, P. H. (2005). Re-configuring museums. Museum Management and 
Curatorship, 20(2), 103–130. 
 
Were, G. (2008). Out of touch? Digital technologies, ethnographic objects and 
sensory orders. In H. Chatterjee (Ed.), Touch in museums: Policy and practice in 
object handling, pp. 121–134. Oxford: Berg. 
 
Wexler, A. (2009). Art and disability. New York: Palgrave MacMillan. 
 
Willis, S., & Helal, S. (2005). RFID information grid for blind navigation and 
wayfinding, IEEE, pp. 34–37. 
 
Wilson, B. (1987). Histories of children’s styles of art: Possibilities and prospects. In: 
B. Wilson and H. Hoffa (Eds.), The history of art education: Proceedings from the 
Penn State Conference, pp. 177–184. Reston, VA: The National Art Education 
Association. 
 
Wirz, S. (1996). Where should research into community based rehab be directed in 
the next ten years? Action Aid Disability News, 7(1): 2–5. 
 
Withagen, A., Vervloed, M. P. J., Janssen, N. M., Knoors, H., & Verhoeven, L. 
(2010). Tactile functioning in children who are blind: A clinical perspective. Journal 
of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 104(1), 43–54. 
 

	  
217	  
Wood, E., & Latham, K. F. (2009). Object knowledge: Researching objects in the 
museum experience. Reconstruction, 9(1) 
 
Wood, E., & Latham, K. F. (2011). The thickness of things: Exploring the curriculum 
of museums through phenomenological touch. JCT (Online), 27(2), 51. 
 
Wright, P. (1989). The quality of visitors’ experiences in art museums. In P. Vergo 
(Ed.), The new museology. London: Reaktion Books. 
 
Xu, F., Spelke, E. S., & Goddard, S. (2005). Number sense in human infants. 
Developmental Science, 8(1), 88–101. 
 
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods (2nd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (3rd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Yiu, K. M., & Tang, G. (2014). Social integration of deaf and hard-of-hearing 
students in a sign bilingual and co-enrollment environment. In: M. Marschark, G. 
Tang and H. Knoors (Eds.), Bilingualism and bilingual deaf education, pp. 342–367. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
York, J., & Pendharkar, P. C. (2004). Human–computer interaction issues for mobile 
computing in a variable work context. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 60, 771–797. 

