 
 
 
 
MUSEUM ACCESSIBILITY AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: THE CHALLENGE OF CO-
DESIGNING PATHWAYS 
 
ACCESSIBILITÀ MUSEALE E PERSONE CON DISABILITÀ: LA SFIDA DELLA CO-
PROGETTAZIONE DEI PERCORSI 
 
Catia Giaconi 
Università degli Studi di Macerata 
catia.giaconi@unimc.it 
 
Noemi Del Bianco 
Università degli Studi di Macerata 
n.delbianco@unimc.it 
 
Ilaria D’Angelo 
Università degli Studi di Macerata 
i.dangelo@unimc.it 
 
Silvia Ceccacci 
Università degli Studi di Macerata 
s.ceccacci@unimc.it 
 
Lucia Borsini 
Università degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli 
lucia.borsini@unicampania.it 
 
Karrie Shogren 
University of Kansas 
shogren@ku.edu 
 
Double Blind Peer Review 
ABSTRACT 
As the UN Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (2006) 
states, participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure and sport is a 
full right connected to the level of inclusiveness that people with 
disabilities can experience. Accordingly, scientific literature upholds 
how access to culture and social life can foster the Quality of Life of 
all people. With the direct involvement of people with disability 
through a participatory methodology, our research group co-
designed, developed and tested innovative digital solutions 
incorporating multisensory technologies and accessible storytelling 
to create an inclusive museum experience. The findings of this study 
provide valuable insights for the development of inclusive design 
solutions in museum contexts, promoting technology integration to 
ensure equal opportunities of participation in social and cultural life. 
 
La Convenzione delle Nazioni Unite sui diritti delle persone con 
disabilità (2006) sancisce il diritto alla partecipazione alla vita 
culturale, al tempo libero e allo sport, il quale è strettamente legato 
al livello di inclusività che le persone con disabilità possono 
sperimentare. La ricerca scientifica conferma che l’accesso alla 
cultura e alla vita sociale può migliorare la qualità della vita per tutti. 
Il nostro gruppo di ricerca ha collaborato direttamente con persone 
con disabilità nella progettazione, sviluppo e sperimentazione di 
soluzioni digitali innovative per creare un’esperienza museale 
inclusiva, integrando tecnologie multisensoriali e una narrazione 
accessibile. Questo studio fornisce indicazioni per lo sviluppo di 
soluzioni progettuali inclusive nei contesti museali, promuovendo 
l’utilizzo delle tecnologie per garantire pari opportunità di 
partecipazione alla vita sociale e culturale 
 
KEYWORDS 
Special Pedagogy, Technological Innovation, Museum Accessibility 
Pedagogia Speciale, Innovazione tecnologica, Accessibilità Museale 
 
Received 29/04/2024 
Accepted 13/06/2024 
Published 
 
Citazione 
D’Angelo, I., Giaconi, C., Del Bianco, N., Borsini, 
L., Ceccacci, S., & Shogren, K. (2024). Museum 
accessibility and people with disabilities: the 
challenge of co-designing pathways. Giornale 
Italiano di Educazione alla Salute, Sport e 
Didattica Inclusiva, 8(2), Edizioni Universitarie 
Romane. 
Doi:  
 
 
Copyright notice: 
© 2023 this is an open access, peer-reviewed 
article published by Open Journal System and 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International, which 
permits unrestricted  use,  distribution,  and  
reproduction  in  any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.  
 
gsdjournal.it 
ISSN: 2532-3296 
ISBN 978-88-7730-493-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Contemporary societies are facing new challenges emerging from the generative 
relationship between territories and institutions concerning the dissemination of 
information and useful skills for social, disseminating scientific knowledge, and 
increasing civic awareness (Giaconi et al., in press). Concerning academic contexts, 
new research paths unfold as part of the Third Mission, which involves creating 
virtuous and sustainable learning ecosystems characterised by digital and cultural 
innovation. In this framework, activating valuable processes requires an approach 
that matures along horizontal trajectories connecting local communities and 
university areas to fully exploit collaborative networks and alliances’ 
epistemological and generative validity (Giaconi et al., 2023). Through work moving 
from theory to practice, in collaboration with key stakeholders, opportunities for 
active understanding and involvement can be created, leading to the practical 
application of research results in the territory. The direct responsibility for social 
change (Varriale et al., 2022; Del Gottardo, Rossiello, 2022) therefore encourages 
university contexts to play a central role in promoting an inclusive culture, both 
inside and outside its institution (Varriale et al., 2022). This process allows 
universities to provide tools and practices, transferring knowledge and enhancing 
the necessary subject competencies. In this line, the dialogue between universities 
and the third sector arises naturally alongside the possibility of research oriented 
towards innovation and the transformation of cultural heritage from an 
accessibility perspective. This requirement, in harmony with the guarantee and 
protection of the rights of persons with disabilities to access cultural heritage (UN, 
2006), allows us to reflect both in terms of physical accessibility (UN, 2006, Article 
9a) and terms of accessibility to cultural content and experiences (UN, 2006, Article 
9b). These premises recall how the pedagogical value of culture and education in 
cultural heritage is functional to social participation and, therefore, to the 
achievement of significant levels of Quality of Life in persons with disabilities 
(Giaconi, 2015). Building on these considerations, this contribution will illustrate 
the redesign process of a museum experience conducted by the research group in 
Special Pedagogy of the University of Macerata to implement accessibility and 
cultural inclusion (Mace, 1985; UN, 2006; Schalock, Verdugo Alonso, 2006; ISTAT, 
2019; Giaconi et al., 2021). 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
1. Museum accessibility: a pedagogical reading  
The concept of accessibility, in line with the studies of Special Pedagogy (Gimenez, 
Thomas, 2015; Greek, 2019; Caldarelli, 2023; Giaconi et al., 2023) and as also 
specified by the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UN, 
2006), goes far beyond the removal of physical barriers (Art. 9a), calling into 
question also forms of accessibility to cultural content and experiences (Art. 9b). 
These considerations encourage cultural institutions to reflect on the usability of 
content and information, ensuring a true involvement in visiting experiences and 
real opportunities for exploration, participation and learning (Giaconi et al., 2023).  
Presenting a brief reconnaissance of the guidelines concerning accessibility in 
places of culture (Rappolt-Schlichtmann, Daley, 2013; Cho, Jolley, 2016; Seale et al., 
2021; Leahy, Ferri, 2022), including museums, it emerges that more attention is 
being paid to the issue of physical accessibility.  
On an international level, we can mention, by way of example, the provisions from 
the International Council of Museums, the leading non-governmental organisation 
of museums and their professionals. Over the years, it has issued guidelines (ICOM 
Accessibility Guidelines) and manuals (ICOM Training Manual: Museums and 
Accessibility) containing operational guidance and suggestions for museum staff 
training on accessibility and inclusion. 
On the European level, the Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to 
member States on the European Cultural Heritage Strategy for the 21st century of 
2017 (Council of Europe, 2017) is one of the main guiding documents for cultural 
heritage policies1, in which multiple implementation strategies are highlighted, 
among which we can observe: activities to increase the participation of visitors with 
physical and sensory disabilities; the design of new paths and ways of presenting 
content; etc. This plurality of provisions is aimed at responding to the diverse needs 
of the visiting public, taking into account the plural modes of interacting with and 
discovering the cultural heritage exhibited. 
Italy’s most recent and important provisions are the Guidelines for Drafting the Plan 
for Eliminating Architectural Barriers in Museums, Museum Complexes, 
Archaeological Areas, and Parks (P.E.B.A) (2018). Again, the main objective is to 
promote accessible and inclusive cultural places by identifying operational lines to 
 
1 https://rm.coe.int/16806f6a03  

 
 
 
 
make cultural resources accessible to a wider audience of visitors, regardless of 
operating profiles. 
Entering into the merits of pedagogical considerations about accessibility, in line 
with the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) (Rappolt-Schlichtmann, 
Daley, 2013; Savia, 2016), our design focus is directed towards the promotion of 
flexible solutions able to respond to the complex interaction that is created 
between the visitor and the museum context (WHO, 2001). In this direction, the 
use of new technologies, such as Apps, Head Mounted Displays (HMDs), 4D sound 
environments, haptic devices, etc., can offer media for the design of accessible 
museum content (Luigini, Panciroli, 2021; Giaconi et al., 2021; Caldarelli, 2023; 
Giaconi et al., 2023). 
A museum space that meets accessibility criteria, for instance, concerning people 
with visual sensory disabilities, can provide plural communication and 
representation channels, such as the enjoyment of cultural content through haptic 
exploration (Fusinetti, Empler, 2019) or audio description listening (Fiorucci, 
Pinnelli, 2013; Del Bianco et al., 2019; Pacinotti, 2019; Perego, 2019). Alongside 
different perceptions and understandings of information, how people navigate and 
actively interact with the museum environment may also differ (Rappolt-
Schlichtmann, Daley, 2013). We can think of those with difficulties in movement, 
communication, orientation, or spatial organisation. For these reasons, in previous 
research (Giaconi et al., 2020; Giaconi et al., 2021), we have highlighted how, 
regarding the functioning profile of people with Autistic Spectrum Disorder who 
have difficulty creating forward models (Barale et al., 2009), Virtual Reality and 
Augmented Reality options can respond to their need for anticipation with respect 
to space exploration. Finally, another element to be considered is the public's 
engagement, which may vary depending on visitors' background of knowledge, 
culture, interest, etc., (Rappolt-Schlichtmann, Daley, 2013). Additionally, in this 
direction, it is important to provide different options, paths and activities that can 
help increase the visitor's active participation (Del Bianco et al., 2019). Different 
possibilities of interaction with the museum environment and activities for a 
customisable engagement can be provided, together with supports and strategies 
(also technology-based) able to respond to specific personalisation needs (Giaconi 
et al., 2023). To this end, using Virtual and/or Augmented Reality solutions or 
Artificial Intelligence can contribute to creating interactive and immersive museum 
environments capable of enhancing audience engagement (Luigini, Panciroli, 2021; 
Rossi et al., 2024).  

 
 
 
 
In this direction, we will present in the following paragraphs a redesign path of a 
museum environment to increase its accessibility through innovative and 
technological solutions and the co-participation of people with disabilities. From 
describing the research design and the activities carried out, we will present the 
entire process to customise the museum visit. We will specifically focus on the 
illustration of a single path co-designed with people with intellectual disabilities for 
the realisation of accessible museum captions—in Easy-to-Read language—with 
the support of new technologies, namely Artificial Intelligence. 
 
2. The research design 
As mentioned in the previous paragraphs, the Special Pedagogy research group 
from the University of Macerata launched a project, to be conducted between 2022 
and 2024, to create a museum exhibition that would make the visit experience 
more accessible. 
To this end, co-design strategies with people with disabilities were implemented to 
support the rearrangement procedures through solutions informed by the 
expertise of the stakeholders. Participatory research (Cornwall, 1995) characterised 
the project from a methodological point of view, orienting the design, development 
and implementation of accessibility solutions and distinguishing it for its highly 
participatory nature and the active involvement of people with disabilities.  
In particular, focus groups were created (Liamputtong, 2011) involving people with 
disabilities to map accessibility needs and identify inclusive strategies for 
implementing the chosen museum path. The participants’ contributions were 
analysed through Qualitative Content Analysis (Schreier, 2012) to develop a 
theoretical framework to identify the potential and limits of museum accessibility. 
The choice of co-designing with people with disabilities allowed us to synergize 
different skills by creating an inclusive museum context, responding to the real 
needs of all visitors. 
For these reasons, the presented project represents a case study (Thomas, Myers, 
2015), providing insights that can lead to significant transformations in the field of 
our interest, namely museum accessibility. 
Based on these assumptions, participatory research was based on the following 
procedural steps (Giaconi et al., 2023): 

 
 
 
 
a. Mapping of critical issues related to the accessibility, both physical and cultural, 
of the museum context involved in the project (6 months); 
b. Co-design of integrated solutions with stakeholders to develop and test 
accessible and inclusive museum paths (6 months); 
c. Development of integrated solutions aimed at the usability of museum spaces 
and contents (9 months); 
d. Re-test of implemented solutions (3 months). 
With reference to the project’s activities, to redesign a museum environment that 
meets both physical accessibility and cultural inclusion criteria, the research team 
was composed of engineers and architects, art historians and archaeologists, 
pedagogists, Easy-to-Read experts, educators and people with disabilities affiliated 
with different associations of the Marche region. 
Regarding the topic discussed in this contribution, we will briefly present the co-
design phase of integrated solutions with stakeholders to develop and test 
accessible and inclusive museum paths (procedural step “b”). 
 
3. Co-design of integrated solutions with stakeholders 
In line with the regulatory provisions on the renewal of museum accessibility and 
inclusion plans (PEBA, 2018) and in continuity with scientific literature (Balcazar et 
al., 1998; Giaconi et al., 2021; Giaconi et al., 2023; Paladini et al., 2023; Chiatti et 
al., 2023), a process of co-design with people with disabilities was initiated to 
develop new integrated paths to be realised within the museum environment.  
Specifically, concerning the mapping of critical issues related to both physical and 
cultural accessibility and to the solutions hypothesised in the focus groups, three 
macro-paths were formulated (Giaconi et al., 2023), as follows:  
a) Easy-to-Read (co-design of integrated solutions with people with intellectual 
disabilities); 
b) Tactile and Haptic (co-design of integrated solutions with people with sensory 
disabilities); 
c) Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) (co-design of integrated 
solutions with people with Autistic Spectrum Disorder). 

 
 
 
 
In the next paragraphs, we will detail the “Easy-to-Read” path (a) and the 
implementation phases carried out during the co-design of integrated solutions 
with people with intellectual disabilities.  
For the “Tactile and Haptic” path (b), the co-design of integrated solutions with 
people with sensory disabilities involved implementing Braille captions, creating 
LOGES# tactile paths, and realising 3D reproductions of significant museum objects. 
In addition, a haptic station that simulates the sense of touch in a virtual 
environment was created. The tactile path was also integrated with a Tactile Map 
and provided different types of tactile tiles in the flooring, each corresponding to 
specific tactile codes2.  
With reference to the “Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR)” path (c), 
the research group focused on the development of immersive and innovative 
environments for multimodal interaction, in particular for people with Autistic 
Spectrum Disorder. The co-design phase began with data collection to construct 
the virtual prototype. The working group chose the main rooms that characterise 
the museum, taking spherical photos with a 360° camera and creating three-
dimensional environments. Using different tools and software3, the prototype was 
calibrated according to the principles of Universal Design for Learning (Rappolt-
Schlichtmann, Daley, 2013; Savia, 2016) and was structured to meet the needs of 
people with Autistic Spectrum Disorder (e.g. predictability and anticipation of 
spaces; the need for real and visual images to understand reality; accessibility to 
cultural objects and content; clarification of symbols, codes and signs in the 
museum) (Giaconi et al., 2021). 
Lastly, the three routes were designed to be used in an integrated way. These 
solutions were included in an application developed for the customisation of 
visiting routes (Giaconi et al., 2023). The main access route for the provision of 
customised solutions is, in fact, an App that, thanks to the use of multiple 
languages, innovative interactive modes and customizable solutions, makes the 
 
2 These codes include directional indications, warnings of passable hazard, attention-service, required 
turn at 90°, X or T crossings, and removable tactile strips to signal stairs and handrails. 
3 Among the main tools used, we mention: a spherical camera Ricoh Theta SC2, a smartphone equipped 
with Android 6.0 operating system, the Ricoh Theta S applications, Ricoh Theta Converter Pro, 
Retouch3 and Marzipano Tool4 which is a free web service based on an open-source library. In 
particular, the file compressed in.zip format returned by Marzipano Tool, is composed mainly of 
JavaScript, CSS and HTML code, being freely editable, it is possible to rewrite it in some places to get 
a better customisation of the contents. 

 
 
 
 
museum experience accessible to an increasingly diverse audience (Fig. 1). In 
addition, among its functions, the App allows the use of content and spaces also on 
occasions other than the in-person museum visit. These prerequisites facilitate the 
design and organisation of educational activities, both before the visit to the 
museum and as a support to the consolidation of learning after the museum 
experience. The intuitive interface, designed according to the principles of 
Universal Design for Learning (Story, Mueller, Mace, 1998; Rappolt-Schlichtmann, 
Daley, 2013) integrates tactile inputs, voice and visual information, allowing users 
to interact with virtual objects in a realistic and engaging way, thus making usable, 
in an alternative way, the artefacts stored in the museum. 
 
Fig. 1 – Application developed for the customisation of visit routes 
 
 
4.1 The “Easy-to-Read” path 
There are numerous useful international guidelines and recommendations 
(Tronbacke, 1997; Freyhoff et al., 1998; Fajardo et al., 2014; Bernabé Caro, Orero, 
2019; Madina, Gonzalez-Dios, Siegel, 2023) for the design of accessible information, 
through clear, direct and simple language. 
Adapting documents in Easy-to-Read language is a cyclical process and involves 
three procedural steps: analysis, transformation and validation. Through these 

 
 
 
 
steps, the active involvement of people with intellectual disabilities and experts in 
Easy-to-Read allows the production of information that effectively meets 
accessibility criteria. However, such participation requires a significant 
commitment and use of human resources, and scholars have sought alternative 
solutions (Suárez-Figueroa et al., 2020). In this regard, several semi-automatic 
systems based on Artificial Intelligence have been proposed, such as Large 
Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT, launched by OpenAI. These promising tools 
can give significant contributions to solving natural language processing tasks (Min 
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Araújo, Aguiar, 2023) to support the analysis of texts 
and verify their compliance with the Easy-to-Read guidelines (Suárez-Figueroa et 
al., 2020). In detail, several methods of automatic simplification of sentences based 
on supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques have been proposed 
over the years (Nisioi et al., 2017; Kumar et al., 2020). With reference, for example, 
to automatically transform reading materials based on Easy-to-Read guidelines, a 
relevant approach that can be applied is the so-called “simplification of sentences”. 
Such an approach consists of “modifying the content and structure of a text to make 
it easier to read and understand, preserving the main idea and approaching the 
original meaning” (Alva-Manchego, Scarton, Specia, 2020, p. 135). 
These considerations encourage us to reflect on using the same semi-automatic 
systems based on Artificial Intelligence (specifically the Large Language Model 
ChatGPT4) since they are functional to support adapting information in Easy-to-
Read. Being aware that AI systems can offer “opportunities to improve and multiply 
the possibilities of human action” (Floridi, 2022, p.284), we intend to use such 
systems as possible tools to optimise co-design processes rather than substituting 
them.  
In this sense, using LLMs to create Easy-to-Read texts was carried out in full 
compliance with the guiding principles proposed by the Inclusion Europe 
movement5. Therefore, in all the procedural steps of transforming the texts into 
Easy-to-Read through the use of LLM systems, up to the testing and re-testing of 
the content produced, people with intellectual disabilities experienced in Easy-to-
Read were involved in verifying effective adherence to the criteria of the same 
guidelines and those of content accessibility. 
 
4 This system is reported as the best in terms of writing, compared to user ratings (Uricchio et al., in 
press). 
5 https://www.inclusion-europe.eu/easy-to-read/ 

 
 
 
 
The specific implementation phases carried out are illustrated below. 
 
4.1.1 The Implementation Protocol 
In the preliminary phase, the level of knowledge of ChatGPT related to the Easy-to-
Read guidelines was assessed by submitting to the chat questions to assess its 
adherence to guidelines.  
In line with the reference literature (Min et al., 2023), a test consisting of 10 open 
questions was prepared, formulated by the research team assisted by experts on 
the Easy to Read Guidelines, to which the LLM responded freely, without any 
predefined structure.  
The questions were sent to various versions of ChatGPT (3.5 and 4.0) using the 
OpenAI API with a Python script.  
The results showed that ChatGPT 4.0 appears to know Easy-to-Read guidelines well. 
Based on the data emerging from this evaluation, a specialised prompt was built to 
direct ChatGPT 4.0 towards producing a text strictly adhered to the Easy-to-Read 
guidelines. In detail, the prompt included: a) a contextual background to direct the 
model to act as an accessibility expert; B) a detailed presentation of the Easy-to-
Read guidelines; and c) explicit instructions to apply the guidelines in 
simplifications. 
Subsequently, the “trained” tool to produce simplified information was used to 
draft 10 simplified museum captions.  
These products of “trained” ChatGPT 4.0 were subjected to the evaluation of the 
working group, composed of experts in Easy-to-Read with and without disabilities 
(people 
with 
intellectual 
disabilities, 
pedagogists, 
art 
historians, 
and 
archaeologists), who assessed their specific adherence to the guidelines through a 
Likert scale from 1 to 5: 
1- Completely incorrect: it significantly deviates from the guidelines, it does not 
meet the basic standards for an easy understanding. 
2- Not sufficiently correct: it shows an attempt to align with the guidelines but fails 
to meet several important aspects. 
3- Sufficiently correct: it adequately meets the guidelines, ensuring a basic level of 
easier understanding. 

 
 
 
 
4- More than sufficiently correct: it meets the basic requirements of the guidelines 
but could be improved. 
5- Completely correct: it adheres perfectly to the guidelines. 
In addition to these quantitative assessments, experts were asked to provide 
qualitative feedback on each text, highlighting strengths and areas of improvement. 
This dual approach made it possible to fully understand the alignment of each text 
with the Easy-to-Read principles and to identify the specific elements that 
contributed or not to the accessibility criteria (Table 1). The quantitative and 
qualitative data collected during this re-test phase guided the subsequent phases 
of re-designing the system and optimizing the texts. 
 
 
Table 1 – Easy-to-Read facilitation process: from the original text to the latest 
version prepared by the research team after the review process. 
 

 
 
 
 
Testo Originale6 
Ultima versione del testo facilitato, 
realizzato grazie al processo di co-
progettazione7 
 
6 Authors’ traduction of the original text: “The Picenian aristocracies used to gather for common meals 
(banquets or symposia). 
This was a custom typical of many ancient civilisations and its introduction in the Picenian area is 
linked to an influence from the Greek world, also well attested among the Etruscans. 
In the grave goods of the tombs of Tolentino we often find objects that can be traced back to the banquet, 
especially vases related to the pouring of wine. 
Among the most representative vessels we find: craters, large vases for preparing wine; stamnoi and 
amphorae, medium-large vessels for storing liquids; small jugs (oinochoi); vessels of various shapes 
used for drinking such as kilikes, large bowls on feet with two handles, and skyphoi, smaller and deeper. 
Many of these objects are imported from Greece, Magna Graecia or Etruria and testify to the wealth of 
the Picenian aristocracies and their adherence to a Mediterranean culture. 
The scenes depicted on some of the objects found and, in particular, on the vases, are often related to 
myth or typical Greek banquet customs such as representations of Heracles or Dionysian scenes. If 
Dionysus is in fact the god who gave wine to mankind, Heracles constitutes the symbolic ﬁgure of the 
aristocracies as a man welcomed among the divinities for his merits. 
At the banquet, other objects were also used for both the preparation and consumption of wine and 
meat. In fact, we find, among the accompanying objects, basins and other bronze vessels, strainers and 
graters, as well as winged and skewered. The preparation of wine was, in ancient times, a rather complex 
process involving, for example, the use of spices and flavourings, dilution with water, heating and 
ﬁltering”. 
7 Authors’ traduction of the final version of the text: “The richest and most powerful Picenian families 
were called aristocrats. Aristocratic families gathered to have meals together.  These meals were called 
banquets or symposia. In the tombs of Tolentino we often find objects that were used at banquets to 
show that the person was important. Among these objects we find vases that were used to mix wine 
with water and some spices and aromas. In ancient times, in fact, it took a long time to prepare wine 
and that is why jars were used. Vases were therefore very important objects that were buried together 
with the person, i.e. they were part of the grave goods. On these vases are depicted the images of 
Dionysus and Heracles. Dionysus is the god of wine. Heracles is such a heroic man that he was 
considered a god. Heracles represents what aristocratic families wanted to do and be. In the grave goods 
of the Tolentino tombs, these vases were found: Craters, which are large vessels for preparing wine; 
Stamnoi and amphorae, which are smaller vessels for storing liquids; Small jugs (oinochoi); Other 
drinking vessels, either cup-shaped (kilikes) or smaller (skyphoi)”. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Le aristocrazie picene usavano riunirsi 
in occasione di pasti comuni (banchetti 
o simposi). 
Si tratta di un’usanza tipica di molte 
civiltà antiche e la sua introduzione in 
area picena è legata ad un’influenza 
proveniente dal mondo greco, ben 
attestata anche tra gli Etruschi. 
Nei corredi delle tombe di Tolentino 
troviamo spesso oggetti riconducibili al 
banchetto, in particolar modo 
vasellame legato alla mescita del vino. 
Tra i vasi più rappresentativi troviamo: 
●  crateri, grandi vasi per la 
preparazione del vino; 
● stamnoi e anforette, vasi di 
medio-grandi dimensioni utili 
alla conservazione dei liquidi; 
● piccole brocche (oinochoi); 
● recipienti di varia forma 
utilizzati per bere come le 
kilikes, larghe coppe su piede 
con due anse, e gli skyphoi, più 
piccoli e profondi. 
Molti di questi oggetti sono importati 
dalla Grecia, dalla Magna Grecia o 
dall’Etruria e testimoniano la ricchezza 
delle aristocrazie picene e la loro 
adesione ad una cultura mediterranea. 
Le scene rappresentate su alcuni degli 
oggetti rinvenuti e, in particolar modo, 
sui vasi, sono spesso relative al mito o 
Le famiglie picene più ricche e potenti si 
chiamavano aristocratiche. 
Le famiglie aristocratiche si riunivano 
per fare pasti insieme.   
Questi pasti si chiamano banchetti o 
simposi.  
Nelle tombe di Tolentino troviamo 
spesso oggetti che si usavano nei 
banchetti per dimostrare che quella 
persona era importante.  
Tra questi oggetti troviamo dei vasi che 
venivano usati per miscelare il vino con 
l’acqua e alcune spezie e aromi. In 
antichità, infatti, serviva molto tempo 
per preparare il vino e per questo 
motivo si usavano i vasi.  
I vasi erano quindi oggetti molto 
importanti che venivano seppelliti 
insieme alla persona, ovvero facevano 
parte del corredo funebre.  
Su questi vasi sono raffigurate le 
immagini di Dioniso ed Eracle. 
Dionosio è il dio del vino. 
Eracle è  un uomo tanto Eroico che era 
considerato un Dio. 
Eracle rappresenta quello che le 
famiglie aristrocatiche volevano fare ed 
essere.   
Nei corredi funebri delle tombe  di 
Tolentino sono stati trovati questi vasi:  

 
 
 
 
alle usanze tipiche del banchetto greco 
come le rappresentazioni di Eracle o di 
scene dionisiache. Se Dioniso è infatti il 
dio che ha donato il vino agli uomini, 
Eracle costituisce la ﬁgura simbolo delle 
aristocrazie in quanto uomo accolto tra 
le divinità per i suoi meriti. 
In occasione del banchetto anche altri 
oggetti venivano utilizzati sia per la 
preparazione 
e il consumo del vino che delle carni. 
Troviamo infatti, tra gli oggetti di 
corredo, bacini e altri recipienti in 
bronzo, colini e grattugie ma anche alari 
e spiedi. La preparazione del vino era, 
anticamente, un processo piuttosto 
articolato che prevedeva, ad esempio, 
l’uso di spezie e aromi, la diluizione con 
acqua, il riscaldamento e il ﬁltraggio. 
Crateri, che sono grandi vasi per 
preparare il vino; 
Stamnoi e anforette, che sono vasi più 
piccoli per conservare i liquidi; 
Piccole brocche (oinochoi); 
Altri vasi per bere, a forma di coppa 
(kilikes) o più piccoli (skyphoi). 
 
4. Conclusions 
This contribution highlights how, within cultural spaces, particularly museums, it is 
possible to realise paths aimed at protecting and guaranteeing plural forms of 
accessibility. Such an approach is supported by guidelines that emphasise the 
cruciality of museums in promoting individual and collective identity by 
constructing an accessible heritage (Council of Europe, 2017; P.E.B.A., 2018; ICOM, 
2022). According to these considerations, museums can increase their credibility 
and authority by committing to cultural accessibility and building relationships with 
government institutions and the community (ICOM, 2022). Therefore, it is essential 
to launch projects involving increasing collaborations with stakeholders to promote 
an increasingly inclusive culture.  
As also highlighted in other works (Giaconi et al., 2021; Shogren et al., 2022), the 
active involvement of persons with disabilities can play a significant role in the 
development of cultural contexts accessible to all. The starting point was 

 
 
 
 
understanding the needs that people with intellectual and sensory disabilities 
experience in museum contexts and then discussing and designing the 
requirements of the proposals to be collectively developed. This study highlights 
how co-design work with people with disabilities can foster the development and 
enhancement of inclusive museum pathways, creating synergies within which the 
museum’s cultural activities and social inclusion mutually reinforce each other 
(Giaconi et al., 2021; Shogren et al., 2022). Co-designing with different 
professionals and people with disabilities represents a significant process that has 
led to the creation of inclusive museum paths and enhancing the personal and 
social empowerment of the people involved.  
In addition, this participatory approach made it possible to accurately identify the 
essential functionalities and specific requirements of the tested digital solutions. In 
line with the principles of UDL (Rappolt-Schlichtmann, Daley, 2013; Savia, 2016) and 
with relevant literature (Fiorucci, Pinnelli, 2013; Del Bianco et al., 2019; Pacinotti, 
2019; Perego, 2019), it seems significant in our opinion to promote a synergistic 
integration between technology and innovation, useful to increase the active 
involvement of all museum users (Solima, 2007; Carci, Gaforio, Gamper, 2019). 
Specifically, we focused on the accessibility of simplified texts in Easy-to-Read, 
exploiting AI’s potential and the competencies of people with disabilities directly 
involved (Floridi, 2022). In this direction, future research trajectories could be 
centred around developing strategies for co-designing prompts to facilitate textual 
content with people with intellectual disabilities experienced in Easy-to-Read. 
As this work underlines, the focus on reciprocity and relationality is crucial to 
creating generative spaces for development and further capitalising on the capacity 
of sharing and mutual involvement (Giaconi et al., 2023). Through micro and macro 
actions in ecosystemic contexts, it is possible to promote the active participation of 
people with disabilities and thus develop an inclusive culture (Molinari et al., 2022). 
Only include indispensable images or drawings or graphics in the article and check 
that they are saved in a format readable by all computers. Images, graphs and 
tables must be captioned with a number. References in the article to the image 
should indicate its type and number (e.g. Fig. 1; Graph.2; Tab. 3). 
 

 
 
 
 
Table 1 (description) 
 
References 
Alva-Manchego F., Scarton C., Specia L. (2020).  Data-driven sentence 
simplification: survey and benchmark. Computational Linguistic, 46(1), 135–187. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/COLIa00370  
Araújo S., Aguiar M. (2023, June). Simplifying Specialized Texts with AI: A ChatGPT-
Based Learning Scenario. In International Conference in Information Technology 
and Education (pp. 599-609). Singapore:Springer Nature Singapore. 
Balcazar F. E., Keys C. B., Kaplan D. L., Suarez-Balcazar, Y. (1998). Participatory 
action research and people with disabilities: Principles and challenges. Canadian 
Journal of rehabilitation, 12, 105–112. Retrieved by: home.interlog.coml-
kroghlkroghlpg105.html 
Barale F., Politi P., Boso M., Broglia D., Orsi P., Pace A., Di Nemi S. U. (2009). 
L’autismo a partire dalla sua evoluzione nell’età adulta: nuove conoscenze, criticità, 
implicazioni abilitative. NÓOς, 3, 257–91. 
Bernabé C. R., Orero P. (2019). Easy to Read as Multimode Accessibility Service. 
Hermēneus. 
Revista 
de 
Traducción 
e 
Interpretación, 
21, 
53–74. 
https://doi.org/10.24197/her.21.2019.53-74 
Caldarelli A. (2023). Linee di pedagogia speciale per l’accessibilità culturale: uno 
studio di caso. Journal of Inclusive Methodology and Technology in Learning and 
Teaching, 
3(1sup), 
1–7. 
Retrieved 
by 
https://www.inclusiveteaching.it/index.php/inclusiveteaching/article/view/90  
Carci G., Caforio A., Gamper C. (2019). Tecnologie digitali nei musei: realtà 
aumentata, apprendimento e audience development. Form@ re, 19(1), 274–286. 
Chiatti C., Mogianesi F. M., Giaconi C. (2023). Musei Inclusivi: esperienze sensoriali 
e immersive per l’accessibilità culturale. In Borsini L., Marfoglia A. (a cura di), 

 
 
 
 
Didattiche Speciali e sfide inclusive: Esperienze e studi di caso per la formazione 
continua (pp. 96-113), Londra:Edizioni Accademiche Italiane. 
Cho H., Jolley A. (2016). Museum education for children with disabilities: 
Development of the nature senses traveling trunk. Journal of Museum Education, 
41(3), 220–229. https://doi.org/10.1080/10598650.2016.1193313 
Circolare n.26 del 25/7/2018, Ministero per i beni e le attività culturali (Mibac), 
Direzione Generale Musei, Linee guida per la redazione del Piano di eliminazione 
delle barriere architettoniche (P.E.B.A.) nei musei, complessi monumentali, aree e 
parchi archeologici. 
Convenzione quadro del Consiglio d’Europa sul valore del patrimonio culturale per 
la Società (CETS no. 199), Faro, 2005. 
Cornwall A., Jewkes, R. (1995). What is participatory research?. Social science & 
medicine, 41(12), 1667–1676. https://doi.org/10.1016/0277-9536(95)00127-S 
Decreto Ministeriale 27 giugno 2017, n. 582. “Linee guida per la redazione del piano 
per l’eliminazione delle barriere architettoniche (P.E.B.A.) nei musei, complessi 
monumentali aree e parchi archeologici’’. Allegato a “Gruppo di lavoro per la 
redazione di provvedimenti anche a livello normativo inerenti il superamento delle 
barriere culturali, cognitive e psicosensoriali nei luoghi della cultura di competenza 
del Ministero per il bene e le attività culturali aperti al pubblico Nella fattispecie 
musei, monumenti, aree e parchi archeologici’’. Ministero della Cultura. 
Del Bianco N., Caldarelli A., D’Angelo I., Crescimbeni M. (Eds.) (2019). L’Escluso 2. 
Nuove storie di resilienza per non vivere infelici e scontenti. Traiettorie Inclusive, 2, 
Milano:FrancoAngeli 
Del Gottardo E., Rossiello C. M. (2022). Terza missione e innovazione sociale: lo 
spin-off universitario “Io faccio futuro”. In Pavone M. et al. (a cura di), Un ponte tra 
l’Università e mondo del lavoro per l’inclusione e la vita indipendente (pp. 220-233). 
Milano:FrancoAngeli. 
Fajardo I., Ávila V., Ferrer A., Tavares G., Gómez M., & Hernández A. (2014). Easy‐
to‐read texts for students with intellectual disability: linguistic factors affecting 
comprehension. Journal of applied research in intellectual disabilities, 27(3), 212–
225.  https://doi.org/10.1111/jar.12065 

 
 
 
 
Fiorucci A., Pinnelli S. (2013). Audio descrizione e disabilità visiva [Audio description 
and visual disability]. Italian Journal of special education for inclusion, 1(1), 133–
147. 
Floridi L. (2022). Etica dell’intelligenza artificiale: Sviluppi, opportunità, sfide. 
Cortina:Raffaello Editore. 
Freyhoff G., Hess G., Linda K., Menzel E., Bror Y., Vander Veken K. (1998). Make It 
Simple, European Guidelines for the Production of Easy-to-Read Information for 
People with Learning Disability. Brussels: International League of Societies for the 
Mentally Handicapped. 
Giaconi C., Ascenzi A., Del Bianco N., D’Angelo I., Capellini S. A. (2021). Virtual and 
Augmented Reality for the Cultural Accessibility of People with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders: A Pilot Study. International Journal of the Inclusive Museum, 14(1), 95–
106. https://doi.org/10.18848/1835-2014/CGP/v14i01/95-106  
Giaconi C., Patera S., Borsini L., Scotta D., D’Angelo I., Del Bianco N. (in press). Il 
ruolo della Pedagogia Speciale per la Terza Missione e l’Impatto Sociale tra pratiche 
trasformative e processi emancipatori. Education Sciences & Society, (1/2024). 
Giaconi C. (2015). Qualità della vita e adulti con disabilità. Percorsi di ricerca e 
prospettive inclusive. Milano:FrancoAngeli. 
Giaconi C., Taddei A., Del Bianco N., Caldarelli A., D’Angelo I. (2020). Dalla “voce 
degli studenti” alla co-progettazione di percorsi inclusivi: uno studio di caso. SIRD, 
2, 186–193. 
Giaconi C., Taddei A., Del Bianco N., D’Angelo I., Ceccacci S. (2023). Special 
pedagogy in Innovative Ecosystems: a pilot project for museums accessibility. 
Italian 
Journal 
of 
Special 
Education 
for 
Inclusion, 
11(2), 
24–34. 
https://doi.org/10.7346/sipes-02-2023-02 
Gimenez, J. and Thomas, P. (2015) ‘A Framework for usable pedagogy: Case studies 
towards accessibility, criticality and visibility’, in Lillis, T, Harrington, K., Lea, M. and 
Mitchell, S. (2015). (eds) Working with academic literacies: case studies towards 
transformative practice, Parlor Press, Perspectives on Writing Series. Open access 
publication available at https://wac.colostate.edu/books/perspectives/lillis/ 
Greco G. M. (2019). Towards a pedagogy of accessibility: The need for critical 
learning spaces in media accessibility education and training. Linguistica 

 
 
 
 
Antverpiensia, New Series–Themes in Translation Studies, 18, 23–46. 
https://doi.org/10.52034/lanstts.v18i0.518 
International Council of Museums [ICOM]. (2022). XXVI General Conference 20‐28 
august. Prague. https://prague2022.icom.museum/  
Istituto Nazionale di Statistica [Istat] (2019). Conoscere il mondo della disabilità. 
Persone, relazioni e istituzioni. Rome:Istituto Nazionale di Statistica 
Kumar, Dhruv, Lili Mou, Lukasz Golab, and Olga Vechtomova. 2020. Iterative edit-
based unsupervised sentence simplification. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7918–7928, Online. 
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1 /2020.acl-main.707 
Leahy A., Ferri D. (2022). Barriers and facilitators to cultural participation by people 
with disabilities: a narrative literature review. Scandinavian Journal of Disability 
Research, 24(1), 68–81. https://doi.org/10.16993/sjdr.863 
Liamputtong P. (2011). Focus group methodology: Principle and practice. Thousand 
Oaks: Sage Publications. 
Liu Y., Han T., Ma S., Zhang J., Yang Y., Tian J., Ge B. (2023). Summary of chatgpt-
related research and perspective towards the future of large language models. 
Meta-Radiology, 100017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metrad.2023.100017 
Luigini A., Panciroli C. (2018). Ambienti digitali per l’educazione all’arte e al 
patrimonio. Milano:FrancoAngeli. 
Mace R. (1985). Universal Design: Barrier-Free Environments for Everyone. 
Designer’s West, 33(1), 147–152. 
Madina M., Gonzalez-Dios I. Siegel M. (2023). Easy-to-Read in Germany: A Survey 
on its Current State and Available Resources. 10th Language & Technology 
Conference: Human Language Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Science 
and Linguistics.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.03189  
Min B., Ross H., Sulem E., Veyseh A. P. B., Nguyen T. H., Sainz O., Roth D. (2023). 
Recent advances in natural language processing via large pre-trained language 
models: 
A 
survey. 
ACM 
Computing 
Surveys, 
56(2), 
1–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3605943 
Molinari A., Cacciapaglia M., Indellicato R., Sandrini S., Marcone V. M. (2022). 
Rethinking Enabling Educational and Training Ecosystems in the Perspective of 

 
 
 
 
Reciprocity. 
Formazione 
& 
insegnamento, 
20(1), 
1028–1041. 
https://doi.org/10.7346/-fei-XX-01-22_92 
Nisioi S., Štajner S., Ponzetto S. P., Dinu L. P. (2017, July). Exploring neural text 
simplification models. In Proceedings of the 55th annual meeting of the association 
for computational linguistics (volume 2: Short papers) (pp. 85-91). 
Pacinotti A. (2019). Linguaggio, relazione ed empatia: audiodescrizione e 
accessibilità museale. Rivista Internazionale di Tecnica della Traduzione, 21, 171–
182. https://doi.org/10.13137/2421-6763/29129  
Paladini P., Ceccacci S., Caldarelli A., D’Angelo I., Giaconi C. (2023). Percorsi di 
accessibilità culturale: il museo tra inclusione e tecnologia. In C. Giaconi, I. 
D’Angelo, A. Marfoglia, C. Gentilozzi (a cura di), Ecosistemi formativi inclusivi (pp. 
101-114), Milano: FrancoAngeli. 
Perego E. (2019). Into the language of museum audio descriptions: a corpus‐based 
study. 
Perspectives, 
27(3), 
333–349. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0907676X.2018.1544648 
Pinnelli S., Ruggieri M. C. (2021). Il Museo come vettore di inclusione e 
partecipazione: l’accessibilità nel Museo Archeologico di Taranto. Italian Journal of 
Special Education for Inclusion, 9(2), 077–093. https://doi.org/10.7346/sipes-02-
2021-09 
Rappolt-Schlichtmann G., Daley S. G., Lim S., Lapinski S., Robinson K. H., Johnson M. 
(2013). Universal Design for Learning and elementary school science: Exploring the 
efficacy, use, and perceptions of a web-based science notebook. Journal of 
educational psychology, 105(4), 1210–1225. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033217 
Rossi M., Berardinetti V., Peconio G., & Simonetti C. (2024). Didattica Museale e 
Realtà Virtuale: quali prospettive educative?. Nuova Secondaria, (6), 381–391. 
http://digital.casalini.it/5748622  
Savia G. (2016). Universal Design for Learning: La Progettazione Universale per 
l’Apprendimento per una didattica inclusiva. Trento:Edizioni Centro Studi Erickson. 
Schalock R. L., Verdugo M. A., Braddock D. L. (2002). Handbook on quality of life for 
human service practitioners. Washington, DC: American Association on Mental 
Retardation. 
Schreier M. (2012). Qualitative content analysis in practice. London: Sage. 

 
 
 
 
Seale J., Garcia Carrizosa H., Rix J., Sheehy K., Hayhoe S. (2021). A participatory 
approach to the evaluation of participatory museum research projects. 
International Journal of Research & Method in Education, 44(1), 20–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1743727X.2019.1706468 
Shogren K.A., Caldarelli A., Del Bianco N., D’Angelo I., Giaconi C. (2022). Co 
designing inclusive museum itineraries with people with disabilities: A case study 
from self-determination. Education Sciences & Society, 2, 214–226. 
Solima L. (2007). Nuove tecnologie della comunicazione. Economia della Cultura, 
17(3), 365–376. https://doi.org/10.1446/25469  
Story M.F., Mueller J.L., Mace R.L. (1998). The universal design file: Designing for 
people of all ages and abilities. Center for Universal Design. 
Suárez-Figueroa M.C., Ruckhaus E., López-Guerrero J., Cano I., Cervera Á. (2020). 
Towards the Assessment of Easy-to-Read Guidelines Using Artificial Intelligence 
Techniques. In Miesenberger, K., Manduchi, R., Covarrubias Rodriguez M., Peňáz P. 
(eds.) Computers Helping People with Special Needs. ICCHP 2020. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, (12376). Springer:Cham. 
Thomas G., Myers K. (2015). The anatomy of the case study. The Journal for 
Decision Makers, 41(4) 344–345. http://digital.casalini.it/9781473926844  
Tronbacke B. (1997). Guidelines for Easy-to-Read Materials. IFLA:The Hague. 
United Nations (2006). Convention on The Rights of Persons with Disabilities. UN, 
New York 
Uricchio T., Ceccacci S., D’Angelo I., Del Bianco N., Giaconi C. (in press). Investigating 
Openai's Chatgpt Capabilities To Improve Accessibility of Textual Information: An 
Explorative Study. HCII. 
Varriale L., Volpe T., Briganti P. (2022). Il ruolo delle università per la promozione 
della cultura dell’inclusione interna ed esterna. In Pavone M. et al. (a cura di), Un 
Ponte tra Università e mondo del lavoro per l'inclusione e la Vita Indipendente (pp. 
191-206), Milano:FrancoAngeli. 
Vaz R., Freitas D., Coelho A. (2020). Blind and visually impaired visitors’ experiences 
in museums: increasing accessibility through assistive technologies. The 
International 
Journal 
of 
the 
Inclusive 
Museum, 
13(2), 
57–80. 
https://doi.org/10.18848/1835-2014/CGP/v13i02/57-80  

