Frontiers in Education
01
frontiersin.org
Assessing the working practices 
and the inclusive programs to 
students with disabilities in the 
Egyptian museums: challenges 
and possibilities for facilitating 
learning and promoting inclusion
Nevine Nizar Zakaria             1,2*
1 Museology Department, Julius Maximilian University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2 Ministry of 
Tourism and Antiquities, Cairo, Egypt
Following the implementation of 2018’s laws on the rights of persons with 
disabilities (PWDs) in Egypt, students with disabilities (SWDs) have both legal and 
moral rights to meaningful learning opportunities and inclusive education. Despite 
that, SWDs still have very limited education resources which limit their career 
aspirations and quality of life. In this respect, education whether as part of formal 
education or lifelong learning is central to the museum’s mission. Museums, 
as part of non-formal education, are being acknowledged for their educative 
powers and investments in the development of quality formal, non-formal, and 
informal learning experiences. Further, phrases such as “inclusivity,” “accessibility,” 
and “diversity” were notably included in the newly approved museum definition 
by ICOM (2022) emphasizing museums’ obligations to embrace societal issues 
and shape a cultural attitude concerning disability rights, diversity, and equality 
together with overcoming exclusionary educational practices. The study seeks 
to investigate the existing resources and inclusive practices in Egyptian museums 
to achieve non-formal education for SWDs. Qualitative research approaches 
have been employed to answer a specific question: How can Egyptian museums 
work within their governing systems to support the learning of SWDs beyond 
their formal education system? The study aims to assess the potential of Egyptian 
museums in facilitating learning for SWDs. Further, it examines the capability 
of Egyptian museums in contributing to informal and non-formal learning for 
SWDs and striving for inclusive education inspired by the social model of disability 
that fosters inclusive educational programs and adopts a human rights-based 
approach. The results revealed that Egyptian museums contributed to the learning 
of SWDs, yet small-scale programs and individual efforts, but they are already 
engaged in active inclusive practices that address the learning of SWDs. The study 
suggests that they need to be acknowledged and supported by the government 
as state instruments and direct actors in advancing inclusive education and 
implementing appropriate pedagogies in favor of SWDs.
KEYWORDS
museum practice, social inclusion, students with disabilities, inclusive education, 
cultural diversity, people with disabilities
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Jessica Norberto Rocha, 
Fundação CECIERJ, Brazil
REVIEWED BY
Christine Reich, 
Museum of Science, United States
Dario Ianes, 
Università Bolzano, Italy
*CORRESPONDENCE
Nevine Nizar Zakaria 
 nevine.zakaria@uni-wuerzburg.de; 
 nevinenizar1@mota.gov.eg
RECEIVED 30 November 2022
ACCEPTED 02 May 2023
PUBLISHED 01 June 2023
CITATION
Zakaria NN (2023) Assessing the working 
practices and the inclusive programs to 
students with disabilities in the Egyptian 
museums: challenges and possibilities for 
facilitating learning and promoting inclusion.
Front. Educ. 8:1111695.
doi: 10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Zakaria. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted 
academic practice. No use, distribution or 
reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
TYPE  Original Research
PUBLISHED  01 June 2023
DOI  10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
02
frontiersin.org
1. Introduction
Children with disabilities are one of the most marginalized and 
excluded groups in the education (Schuelka and Johnstone, 2012; 
UNESCO, 2020). There is no doubt that inclusive education for SWDs 
in developing countries is still difficult to achieve (Srivastava et al., 
2015). Despite that, the rights of children and youth with disabilities 
are widely recognized in the Egyptian constitution, Egypt’s Strategic 
Vision 2030, and the new legislation of the state; they still face several 
barriers to accessing their educational resources (Ministry of 
Education, 2014; Zakaria, 2020; Hassanein et al., 2021). Their barriers 
range from inaccessible transportation services and facilities to, most 
importantly, attitudinal and intellectual barriers, to the effectuation of 
laws to be fully integrated into Egyptian society. One of the major 
barriers to the inclusion of SWDs in Egypt is the attempt of the 
Egyptian government to adopt a Western-style education system 
rather than developing a specific education system that fits the social, 
cultural, political, and educational context of Egyptian society (Kim, 
2014; Hassanein et al., 2021).
The study argued that Egyptian museums can contribute to the 
practices of inclusive education and the successful implementation of 
Egypt’s strategic goals toward the full inclusion of learners with 
disabilities. Museums, as non-formal learning environments (Hooper-
Greenhill, 1999, 2007; Dierking, 2005; Falk and Dierking, 2016) and 
social institutions (Silverman, 2010; Morse, 2022), may embrace 
diversity among all people including PWDs, and support the learning 
opportunities for SWDs (Sandell, 2002, 2003, 2017; Kanari and 
Souliotou, 2020). Museums have educative powers and social impact 
that reflected upon supporting formal and non-formal education 
(Black, 2012; Falk and Dierking, 2016), serving communities 
(Silverman, 2010; Morse, 2022), addressing discrimination and 
stereotypes, combating prejudices and inequality (Sandell, 2002, 2017; 
Sandell and Dodd, 2010; Sandell and Nightingale, 2012), and making 
institutional changes for the betterment of society (Fleming, 2012; 
McCall and Gray, 2014).
Within the framework of the social model of disability that 
emphasizes the socio-environmental barriers that exclude PWDs 
(Shakespeare and Watson, 2002; Shakespeare, 2006; Oliver, 2013; 
Rocha et al., 2022), museums can actively raise the awareness of 
lawmakers, policymakers, and other organizations in Egypt about the 
societal barriers faced by individuals with disabilities and their effect 
on the implementation of inclusive education (Zakaria, 2020), and 
thus support the education system to identify barriers to inclusion and 
develop the appropriate policies and practices needed for SWDs’ 
education. Furthermore, progress can be achieved by incorporating 
the museums of Egypt, as educational institutions, among the essential 
instruments of the state that should be used alongside schools in 
supporting the learning processes for SWDs (Bennett, 1995; Hein, 
2006; Hooper-Greenhill, 2007).
Much of the literature in the museum studies field used “informal” 
and “non-formal” terms in relation to the educational practices in 
museums in an approach to elaborate on the educational 
characteristics of the programs and activities museums offered 
(Hooper-Greenhill, 1999, 2007; Falk and Dierking, 2000; Dierking, 
2005; Hein, 2006). While museums are perceived as “informal 
education institutions” and “free-choice” learning spaces with multiple 
leisure experiences, the term “non-formal” is usually used within 
museums to refer to the learning programs and activities that take 
place outside the formal educational setting (Falk et al., 2006; Falk and 
Dierking, 2016; McGhie, 2020).
The study aims to investigate the role of museums as formal, 
informal, and non-formal learning environments in promoting 
education for SWDs and supporting the formal education system of 
Egypt in realizing their rights. The objectives of the study are, 
therefore, twofold. Firstly, to assess the capability of Egyptian 
museums’ potential in facilitating both informal and non-formal 
learning for SWDs. Secondly, to argue the social responsibilities of the 
museums in fostering inclusive practices and striving for SWDs’ rights 
in education and thus contribute to their integration into society. In 
pursuit of these objectives, a qualitative approach was adopted using 
semi-structured interviews with twenty-three museum professionals 
in a variety of institutional settings (i.e., different types of museums 
and concerned administrative divisions) to assess the effectiveness of 
Egyptian museums in performing these roles and responsibilities. In 
addition, five semi-structured interviews were performed with 
students with multiple disabilities to reflect their voices in the existing 
inclusive practices of the studied museums.
2. Setting the context: the evolving 
roles of museums in education, 
learning, and inclusion
Today, the traditional roles of museums as institutions for 
collecting, preserving, and displaying artifacts have been adjusted, 
expanded, and evolved to meet the ongoing changes in society. 
Museums as an integral part of society are invaluable resources that 
constitute education and knowledge for individuals and communities. 
As public institutions, museums are for all and act as a great source of 
learning and inspiration for everyone coming through the doors 
(Hooper-Greenhill, 1992; Bennett, 1995; Black, 2012; Chen, 2013). 
The functional origin of museums is to provide education and learning 
for people and their communities (Hooper-Greenhill, 1999, 2007; 
Talboys, 2005). Museums buildings, exhibitions, collections, and other 
associated knowledge that emerged from curatorship practices and 
interpretation strategies are forming the basis of a wide range of 
education and learning programs that support people’s knowledge and 
regulate their thinking in society (Hooper-Greenhill, 2000, 2007; 
Marstine, 2006; Chen, 2013).
The educational purpose of museums is well-documented 
throughout museum history. Since the 19th century, museums, as 
major instruments of the state, dedicated to the education and 
edification of the general public (Bennett, 1995; Hein, 2002, 2006). By 
the beginning of the 20th century, museums were recognized for their 
significant role in teaching, as they served as educational resources 
along with schools and universities (Hooper-Greenhill, 1999, 2007; 
Falk and Dierking, 2000, 2016; Chen, 2013). The 1974’s museum 
definition of the International Council of Museums (ICOM) 
emphasized the educational role of museums as: “A non-profit making, 
permanent institution in the service of society and of its development, 
and open to the public for purposes of study, education, and enjoyment, 
material evidence of man and his environment” (Sandahl, 2019; 
Lehmannová, 2020). Several museum’s literatures including the 
publication of 1984’s “Museums for a New Century” have also declared 
that “education is the primary purpose of museums” (American 
Association of Museums, 1984).

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
03
frontiersin.org
In 1992, the American Association of Museums (AAM) issued a 
landmark document entitled “Excellence and Equity: Education and the 
Public Dimension of Museums” highlighting the museum’s obligation 
to public education of every age (Cochran Hirzy and American 
Association of Museums, 1998). While the United Kingdom’s Museums 
Associations (MA) agreed on a definition for a museum in 1998 stating 
that “Museums enable people to explore collections for inspiration, 
learning, and enjoyment (etc.)” assuring that learning is among the core 
roles of museums, which imply that museums moved from the 
education programs oriented towards children to learning individuals 
of all ages through an enjoyable experience (Museum Associations, 
2020). In the late 1990s, museums incorporated digital technologies 
into their educational services seeking more engagement with the 
public (Hawkey, 2004; Jewitt, 2012).
Since the late 20th century, museum organizations have moved 
from objects-oriented museology to visitors-oriented museology- an 
approach that fosters the relationship between museums and the 
needs of their visitors (Velázquez Marroni, 2017; Coleman, 2018). This 
shift has been described by Stephen Weil as a museum movement 
“from being about something to being for somebody” acknowledging 
museums’ obligations towards serving the “public’s own needs and 
interests” (Weil, 1999, 2002). In doing so, museums are performing 
their public service roles by providing educational and learning 
experiences for the betterment of society (O’Neill, 2002; Silverman, 
2010). By this time, museums have gone through a process of change 
asserting that educational responsibility is not museums’ sole active 
public-service role. Further, as “a vehicle for social integration,” 
museums have a great social impact on the quality of individuals’ lives 
and their communities’ well-being and can influence society and 
contribute to its development (Sandell, 2002, 2017; Silverman, 2010; 
Dodd, 2015).
In response to the pluralistic and rapidly changing society of the 
21st century, the museum’s public service dimension has been 
expanded to support the inclusion of a broader spectrum of a diverse 
society (Silverman, 2010; McCall and Gray, 2014; Brown and Mairesse, 
2018; Morse, 2022). The concept of social inclusion has been 
embedded into museums’ organizational policies and programs to 
embrace equality and empower marginalized individuals including 
PWDs (Sandell, 2003; Sandell et al., 2010; Fleming, 2012; Reich, 2014; 
Moore et al., 2022). Museums have been used as “social agencies” not 
only to impart education but also to bring moral values and social 
justice to society (Sandell, 2002; Tlili, 2008; O’Neill, 2011; Sandell and 
Nightingale, 2012; Brown and Mairesse, 2018; Janes and Sandell, 
2019). Most recently, there is a widespread acceptance of the museum’s 
role as “an agent for social change” in combating social inequality and 
promoting social justice and human rights (Sandell, 1998, 2002; 
Moore et al., 2022, 11–28; Morse, 2022, 10–19).
Despite that, the ICOM definition versions of 2002 and 2007 
reemphasize the museum’s purposes as an educational and study 
facility as well as reaffirming the museum’s role “in the service of 
society and its development” (McCall and Gray, 2014; Brown and 
Mairesse, 2018; Sandahl, 2019) but still does not reflect the 
21st-century museum’s commitments and the visions towards the 
future. Therefore, the ICOM seeks its members and interested parties 
to partake in a more updated definition that expresses the museum’s 
responsibilities toward the sustainable, ethical, political, social, and 
cultural challenges in the 21st century. The newly approved definition 
by ICOM during the 26th ICOM General Conference in Prague on 24 
August 2022 reads: “A museum is a not-for-profit, permanent 
institution in the service of society that researches, collects, conserves, 
interprets and exhibits tangible and intangible heritage. Open to the 
public, accessible and inclusive, museums foster diversity and 
sustainability. They operate and communicate ethically, professionally 
and with the participation of communities, offering varied experiences 
for education, enjoyment, reflection and knowledge sharing” 
(International Council of Museums (ICOM), 2022). Phrases such as 
“Inclusivity,” “Accessibility,” “Diversity,” “Sustainability,” and “operate/
communicate ethically” present expanded roles of museums’ 
educational and social responsibilities that involve the entire museum 
organization to be operated by equal justice initiatives and to engage 
in developing sustainable solutions toward respecting human rights 
and social justice (Cândido and Pappalardo, 2022).
Museum educational and social roles are constantly stretched with 
new possibilities and changes to be more socially relevant to their 
visitors (Dodd, 2015), support human rights and diversity (Sandell, 
2017; McGhie, 2020), and combat social inequalities (Sandell, 1998, 
2002, 2017; Janes and Sandell, 2019). Interestingly, these emergent 
notions of inclusion, diversity, and supporting disability rights have 
penetrated the museums’ context and become central to exhibitions 
and displays in the United Kingdom (Sandell et al., 2010; Dodd, 2015), 
United States (Reich, 2014, 2–8; Moore et al., 2022, 60–64), and other 
examples worldwide (Martins, 2018). The representations of disability 
and portraying PWDs in a series of exhibitions narratives with 
explanatory materials and educational resources are becoming broadly 
accepted practices among the inclusive approaches of museums 
toward challenging stereotyping, and prejudice, and framing society’s 
perceptions of disability through the lens of the social model (Delin, 
2002; Sandell and Dodd, 2010; Dodd, 2015; Martins, 2018). No doubt 
that this approach is contributing largely to institutional changes in 
society’s perception of disability culture and promoting positive 
attitudes and tolerance towards the rights of PWDs.
From this point, as “institutions with moral functions” (Hein, 
2000, 106), museums have a moral responsibility to promote the rights 
of access of all people to quality education (Fernandes and Norberto 
Rocha, 2022, 1–2) and democratization of knowledge that caters to all 
including socially vulnerable groups and PWDs (UNESCO, 2016). In 
doing so, museums are cooperating with PWDs, as protagonists and 
professionals, in eliminating barriers and offering more accessible 
environments and services to ensure physical, intellectual, attitudinal, 
and communicational access for all visitors with disabilities (Walters, 
2009; Antoniou et al., 2013; Rocha et al., 2020). Several educational 
programs and activities target school children with disabilities are 
demonstrated to enable them to learn, enjoy and interact with exhibits 
without any barriers (Antoniou et al., 2013; Kanari and Souliotou, 
2020). Studies regarding the inclusion of PWDs in museum learning 
underline a range of organizational actions to ensure the sustainment 
of learning for SWDs and promote institutional inclusive practices 
(Reich, 2014).
Further, the role of museums -as a non-formal learning 
institution- in the education of SWDs has been subjected to intensive 
study and relevant practices (Dierking, 1991, 2005; Falk and Dierking, 
2000, 2016; Hein, 2002; Hooper-Greenhill, 2007; Reich, 2014). Several 
principles and theoretical frameworks have been developed to support 
their education. Differentiated Instruction (DI), the Universal Design 
for Learning (UDL), and STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, 
Arts & Mathematics) are among the different models that have been 

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
04
frontiersin.org
adopted in the museums’ context in alignment with the school 
curriculum to promote engagement, motivation, and inclusion in the 
learning process for children with disabilities (Kanari and 
Souliotou, 2020).
3. Interpreting disability in Egypt and 
claiming rights
Disability is a global rising concern that is perceived differently in 
numerous controversial ways. According to “The World Report on 
Disability” published by World Health Organization (WHO) (2011), 
disability is conceived as “an umbrella term for impairments, activity 
limitations, and participation restrictions, referring to the negative 
aspects of the interaction between an individual (with a health 
condition) and that individual’s contextual factors (environmental and 
personal factors)” (World Health Organization (WHO), 2011, 4). 
Similarly, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities defines persons with disabilities as “those who have 
long term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which 
in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective 
participation in society on an equal basis with others” (United Nations, 
2006, 1).
In Egypt, the person with a disability is defined, according to Law 
no. 10 of the year 2018 (article 2) as “any person who has a full or 
partial disorder or impairment for a long-term be it physical, mental, 
intellectual or sensory; if this disorder or impairment is stable; and 
which in interaction with various barriers, may hinder their full and 
effective participation in society on an equal basis with the others” [(Law 
No. 10 of 2018, 2020, 6) 10 of the year 2018, article 2, p. 6]. Thus, the 
focus in these definitions is on long-term physical, mental, and 
sensory impairments that hinder the individual from full integration 
into society.
Disability is best understood globally through the disability 
models that reflect several conceptual framings in dealing with PWDs. 
In disability studies, there are many different models for disability. 
Four main models are the most prominent in understanding and 
perceiving the disability (Barnes et al., 1999; Thomas, 2007; Oliver, 
2013; Smith and Bundon, 2018). Two of them can be  described 
generally through two main approaches: the individualistic medical 
approach opposed to the social approach (Barnes et al., 1999). The 
medical approach is regarded as a functional limitation of a person’s 
disability in which he/she is perceived as a patient in need of medical 
health care (Shakespeare, 2014; Baglieri and Shapiro, 2017). While the 
social approach to disability -that is developed in the 1970s as part of 
the disability movement in United Kingdom-perceived disability as a 
disadvantage or restriction of activity caused by a contemporary 
society that fails to meet the needs of people with impairments (Stone, 
1999; Shakespeare and Watson, 2001; Shakespeare, 2014). It is, 
therefore, supporting the need for improvements in the social, 
physical, and attitudinal environments to enable PWDs to participate 
in society on an equal basis with others, and thus is the groundbreaking 
civil rights-based approach to disability that supports an inclusive 
society for all (Baglieri and Shapiro, 2017).
The other two models are described as the social-relational model 
and the human rights model. The social-relational model derived its 
roots from the critiques of the social model and social relationships 
between people that construct and enact disablism and disability 
(Smith and Bundon, 2018; Sang et al., 2022). It conceptualized several 
forms of social oppression and ‘ableist’ practices people experience in 
an attempt to change policies and practices to shift from ableism to 
inclusion (Thomas, 2004, 2007; Smith and Bundon, 2018). Unlike the 
social model and the social-relational model that recognize disability 
as an outcome of social process, the human rights model, as the name 
suggests, is underpinned by the basic principles of human rights in 
which PWDs need to participate in all aspects of society on an equal 
basis with their non-disabled peers (Degener, 2016; Smith and 
Bundon, 2018).
Despite that the disability condition in Egypt has improved over 
the past decades, but, as in many countries in the Middle East and 
North Africa-MENA region, the medial individualistic model of 
disability is still the dominant paradigm in Egypt (Zakaria, 2020). 
Egyptian society still prevailed with inaccessible built environments 
that caused the exclusion of PWDs in the various sectors, whether 
education, health, transportation, or otherwise (Hagrass, 2005; Lord 
and Stein, 2018; Elhadi, 2021). Additionally, there are still many social, 
cultural, and economic barriers that need to be eliminated to enable 
the inclusion of PWDs in social and economic activities in the country 
(Hagrass, 2005; Zakaria, 2020).
3.1. Legal delineation
The article 81 of the current Egyptian constitution of 2014 asserts 
the state’s full commitment to the rights of people with disabilities. It 
stated, “The state shall guarantee the health, economic, social, cultural, 
entertainment, sporting, and educational rights of persons with 
disabilities” (Constitute, 2017). Unlike the Rehabilitation Law 39 of 
1975 which focuses on social insurance and pensions for citizens with 
disabilities, the new disability legislation -Law No. 10 of the year 2018- 
granted equality of opportunities and inclusion for PWDs in all 
sectors. It ensures that PWDs enjoy all their human rights on equal 
bases with others and supports their full integration into society as 
well as adopts inclusive environments and rehabilitation programs to 
ensure that PWDs exercises their rights and freedom equally with 
others (Zakaria, 2020).
There is no doubt that this new legislation reveals positive 
developmental reforms in supporting the rights of PWDs in all sectors 
of the state including health, legal protections, employment, political 
activities, and cultural rights. Further, it includes provisions for the 
rights of persons with disabilities in education at all levels. Despite 
these legislative reforms toward the inclusion of PWDs in Egyptian 
society, they are poorly enforced on the ground. There are still many 
detailed regulations and measures that need to be issued to effectuate 
the law’s provisions and put them into practice together with the 
concerned official bodies.
As part of the international obligation towards human rights, 
Egypt has signed the international convention of human rights and 
has formally recognized that all people have certain civil, political, 
economic, social, cultural, and development rights (Rioux and 
Carbert, 2003). In 2008, Egypt signed and ratified the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability (CRPD). Based 
on article 33 of the CRPD, Egypt established “the National Council for 
Disability Affairs” in 2012 (United Nations OHCHR, n.d.). This 
council was replaced in 2019 by “The National Council for People with 
Disabilities” in accordance with Egyptian Law No. 10. The goal of this 

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
05
frontiersin.org
new council was to develop strategies for the rehabilitation, inclusion, 
and empowerment of PWDs.
3.2. Inclusive education of students with 
disabilities in Egypt
Inclusion in education is considered a basic human right for every 
child (Srivastava et al., 2015; UNESCO, 2020). Inclusive education 
focused mainly on students with disabilities (SWDs) and their rights 
to be educated and attend regular schools. It emerged from the 1994’ 
Salamanca Framework for Action on Special Needs Education which 
acknowledged education as having an essential role in eliminating 
discrimination and promoting social justice and thus encouraged 
governments to stop segregating educational provisions for children 
with disabilities to ensure schools “…accommodate all children 
regardless of their physical, intellectual, social, emotional, linguistic or 
other condition” (UNESCO, 1994).
It has been spelled clearly in the article (24, b) of the CRPD to 
ensure “an inclusive education at all levels and lifelong learning” for all 
PWDs. It has referred to the rights of SWDs as “access an inclusive, 
quality, and free primary and secondary education on an equal basis 
with others in the communities in which they live” (United 
Nations, 2006).
UNESCO defined inclusive education as “a transformative process 
that ensures full participation and access to quality learning 
opportunities for all children, young people, and adults, respecting and 
valuing diversity, and eliminating all forms of discrimination in and 
through education” (Cali Commitment, 2019). As term inclusion 
refers to respect for diversity, equal opportunities in education, and 
universal human rights that allows all students to have access to 
education regardless of their strengths, weakness, abilities, and 
disabilities. It is an approach that obligates preschools, schools, and 
other educational settings to promote a school-child-friendly learning 
environment for all children including those with disabilities. Even 
though the terms ‘inclusion’ and ‘integration’ are not the same, they 
are used interchangeably in referring to the practice of educating 
SWDs. Integration is more about mainstreaming SWDs in regular 
classrooms, but inclusion is associated with accommodating all 
children (Wapling, 2016). The term inclusive education has been 
stated several times in Egyptian disability Law No. 10 of 2018. Yet, no 
specific definition was provided, nor elaboration was found.
The educational system of Egypt is classified as one of the largest 
education systems in the MENA region (PWC, 2017). The structure 
of Egyptian education is based upon an extremely centralized and 
hierarchical framework. On its top lies the Ministry of Education, 
which is responsible for developing and monitoring education-related 
policies, curriculum development, and overall educational plans 
(Ministry of Education, 2014). According to the Central Agency for 
Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS), the number of total 
enrollments of Egyptian students in 2019/2020 basic education is over 
19.7 million students, in addition to 1.5 million children registered in 
Kindergarten (KG) (Central Agency for Mobilization and Statistics 
(CAMPAS), 2020). The general education stages (the pre-university 
education) are divided, respectively, into primary (6 years), 
preparatory (3 years), and secondary (3 years). These 12 schooling 
years make up compulsory basic education through two types of 
schools, namely public schools, and private schools (ElRashidy, 2017, 
25–36). While the CAPMAS announced that approximately 15% of 
the Egyptian population who are 5 years and older have disabilities, 
there is a lack of data and statistics on the number of SWDs in 
education (Central Agency for Mobilization and Statistics (CAMPAS), 
2017; Zakaria, 2020).
In 2013, the Ministry of Education reported that 7–10% of 
students enrolled in the education system have disabilities ranging 
from physical, and intellectual disabilities to visual and hearing 
impairments (Handicap International Humanity and Inclusion, 2022). 
The education of SWDs is entrusted to the General Directorate for 
Special Education, which is affiliated with the Ministry of Education. 
It is responsible for developing educational services for SWDs through 
three main departments, namely, the visual disability department, the 
hearing disability department, and the intellectual disability 
department (Elhadi, 2021; Ministry of Education, 2021). The SWDs 
are enrolling in public education schools where special independent 
classes are designed for them, or in special education schools which is 
the prevailing model in Egypt.
Recently, several efforts have been made to integrate SWDs into 
well-equipped schools after Egypt’s endorsement of the CRPD 
(Hassanein et al., 2021). The educational provisions for SWDs were 
clearly stated in many Ministerial Decrees issued by the Ministry of 
Education including the Ministerial Decree No. 42 of the year 2008 
which ensured the formulation of a specialized committee aimed at 
the promotion of SWDs’ inclusion in public education as well as 
developing an operational framework to put this aim into practice. In 
addition, Ministerial Decree No. 94 of the year 2009 ensured the 
inclusion of children with mild disabilities in all stages of the public 
school (Elhadi, 2021).
Following the strategic plan of the Ministry of Education for 
pre-university education (2014–2030), which is part of Egypt’s Vision 
2030 -Sustainable Development Strategy- SDS (Ministry of Planning, 
Monitoring and Administrative Reform, 2015). The Ministry of 
Education is committed to ensuring the rights of every child to equally 
obtain a good-quality education allowing him/her to contribute 
effectively to society including all SWDs (Ministry of Education, 2014; 
ElRashidy, 2017, 25–36). It affirmed the full integration of children 
with minor/basic disabilities in pre-university schools. At the same 
time, improving the current services and accommodations in special 
education schools. In response to these strategic goals, the ministry 
updated the aforementioned Ministerial Decrees in 2015 to mandate 
the admission of students with mild disabilities into all stages of the 
education system, whether in public or private schools. This resulted 
in the establishment of new schools dedicated to SWDs along with the 
promotion of accessible infrastructure to help fully integrate SWDs 
into the education process (Ministry of Education, 2014).
Despite this progress, SWDs are facing major barriers in their 
education. Their integration into mainstream public education and 
community schools is only partial with very limited quality education 
and rigid curricula. They lacked accessible utilities, equipment, 
teachers’ preparation on inclusive education strategies, and 
inaccessible physical and remote learning environments. Not to 
mention the weak enforcement of the laws and the challenges of 
applying the commitments to inclusive education as outlined in CRPD 
(ElRashidy, 2017; Elhadi, 2021; Hassanein et al., 2021). Limited data 
on out-of-school children with disabilities in the national education 
system is hampering the progress in inclusive education as they 
remain invisible (Hassanein et  al., 2021; Handicap International 

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
06
frontiersin.org
Humanity and Inclusion, 2022). Further, attitudinal barriers and 
misconceptions by the community about disability led to a lack of 
recognition of the importance of education for SWDs, especially in 
rural areas and among those who are refugees. Also, stigma and 
discrimination led to bullying against SWDs and segregation of them 
in the education system where they faced several barriers in the 
learning environment (Handicap International Humanity and 
Inclusion, 2022).
In this respect, Egyptian museums, as non-formal and informal 
educational institutions, can contribute to the practices of inclusive 
education and support the learning of SWDs beyond their formal 
education system. As educational service providers, museums can 
develop useful learning resources in collaboration with schoolteachers 
to improve the education of SWDs (Antoniou et al., 2013; Kanari and 
Souliotou, 2020). Moreover, they can contribute to societal changes in 
Egypt, more precisely, changing disability-related narratives and thus 
accelerating the inclusive practices and expanding the acceptance of 
the educational rights of SWDs as human rights. In adopting the new 
possibilities of what museums sought to be now, as acknowledged by 
the new 2022 ICOM museum definition, museums can act as 
generators for social movements to embrace inclusive practices, 
combat prejudice, and promote social justice in favor of SWDs.
4. Museum education and inclusive 
practices in Egyptian museums
Egyptian museums are collection-based institutions that 
originated as warehouses for storing and preserving excavation 
artifacts (Wendy, 2008; Zakaria, 2019, 540–541). Even though the 
nineteenth century witnessed a pioneering role in the field of museum 
education in Egypt when the Egyptologist Ahmed Kamal established 
a school attached to the Egyptian Museum of Bulaq, as early as 1882, 
funded by the Antiquities department to teach Egyptians; art, history, 
ancient Egyptian language, and other subjects related to the history of 
the museum collections (Said Louay, 2002; Baligh, 2005). There was a 
noticeable stagnation in the state of museum education in the later 
decades whereas Egyptian museums lacked any educational programs 
for the public as they have been largely represented and curated for 
tourists and scholars (Abd El-Gawad and Stevenson, 2021, 124–126).
Since the last quarter of the twentieth century, there was a notable 
growth in the number of Egyptian museums all over the country along 
with a significant increase in the number of Egyptian visitors and their 
participation in museums’ programs and events (Wendy, 2008; 
Mahmoud, 2012). The Egyptian museums became actively engaged in 
educational programs and social events with the public. They 
committed to “educating the native Egyptians about their heritage” 
through a wide range of educational and learning programs that 
targeted children, school students, families, youths, and adults 
(Hawass, 2005). By this time, there was a remarkable expansion in the 
museum’s types, roles, and social activities. Several regional museums 
were created and spread in most of the country’s governates to educate 
the locals about the history of their regions, fostering their sense of 
belonging, and thus encouraging them to participate in museum 
activities (El-Saddik, 1993, 105–122). In parallel, modern art, site, 
historic house, ethnology, specialized, and antiquities museums were 
established and funded by the Egyptian government as part of the 
cultural agenda of the state (Wendy, 2008). The Egyptian museums 
gradually transformed from tourist-oriented museums to attracting 
more segments of local visitors.
4.1. Efforts to engage people with 
disabilities in Egyptian museums
Since the 1990s, the role of the Egyptian museums in educating 
children and youth was well-recognized when Egypt’s first lady 
initiate a plan to promote children’s education by using several state 
instruments, museums were among them (Baligh, 2005). This 
approach was supported by international organizations-the German 
Hans Seidel Foundation- which provided condensed workshops, 
activities, and special training on museum education from 1994 to 
1996 to curators from different museums all over the country 
(El-Saddik, 1993; Baligh, 2005). Further, museological training 
courses for the museum personnel were designed by UNESCO, 
ICOM, and other international organizations to improve their skills 
and competence in all museum areas including the field of museum 
education (Mahmoud, 2012, 156–166).
This has resulted in delivering several educational programs at 
Egypt’s museums that were not limited only to the main national 
museums such as the Egyptian Museum of Cairo (EMC). Still, further, 
it was extended to many regional museums such as Tanta Museum, 
Port-Said Museum, Mallawi Museum, Luxor Museum, and Nubian 
Museum (Baligh, 2005; Hawass, 2005). This was alongside the 
launching of several initiatives by the Greco-Roman Museum of 
Alexandria to address children and individuals with disabilities of all 
ages, in cooperation with special education schools for SWDs as well 
as the Departments of Psychology, Sociology, and History at the 
Faculty of Arts of Alexandria University (El-Saddik, 1993; Baligh, 
2005; Hawass, 2005).
In 1996, the first museum for children was established by an NGO, 
namely, the Association of Heliopolis, in the Heliopolis area of Cairo, 
allowing the children to use all their senses to learn and interact with 
the exhibits and obtain knowledge by using technology (El-Saddik, 
1993, 64–68). It has been expanded, remodeled, and fully completed 
in 2012. Following the re-opening of the children’s museum, it was 
renamed “the Children’s Civilization and Creativity Center-Child 
Museum” (Mallinson Architects and Engineers, 2023). It offers more 
engaging hands-on learning activities and welcomes a wider number 
of children along with their families (up to 1,200 schoolchildren each 
day; El-Saddik, 1993; Heliopolis Association, 2023; Mallinson 
Architects and Engineers, 2023). It was not until 2017 that the 
museum initiated special programs oriented toward SWDs. Since 
then, the museum is working regularly with special needs schools and 
disability organizations to offer a variety of programs, activities, and 
workshops for kids and children with disabilities, together with family 
and friends. One of the museum’s disability-specific programs is the 
“Edraak” Program that is focusing on improving the skills of children 
with intellectual disabilities as well as raising awareness of their rights 
to be fully integrated into society (Egypt Today, 2021; Figure 1).
In 2002, EMC founded a museum school– the Cairo Museum 
School- targeting school-age children with many school programs that 
were designed by the museum curators in cooperation with national 
and international schools to enrich the children’s knowledge in 
compliance with their curricula (Eldamaty, 2004; Baligh, 2005). In 
parallel, special education programs have been made to welcome 

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
07
frontiersin.org
visually-, hearing- and physically impaired students (The Egyptian 
Museum, 2009). Furthermore, several coordination arrangements were 
undertaken between the EMC and the Ministry of Social Affairs (Now, 
Ministry of Social Solidarity), and the National Center for Child’s 
Culture affiliated with the Ministry of Culture to create special education 
programs for blind- and hearing-impaired individuals (The Egyptian 
Museum, 2009). Also, Mobile Museum and outreach programs were 
carried out in public schools as well as special schools for SWDs to 
reinforce the educational role of the museum (Eldamaty, 2004). This 
school is the core foundation of the current Educational Department at 
the EMC that’s still actively working on providing educational and 
learning programs for the locals, school children, youth, and PWDs 
among other targeted visitors. In 2004, the growing support and interest 
in engaging children and individuals with disabilities were reflected by 
the establishment of the educational school/section at the EMC or the 
Visually Impaired School, as they are often referred to. The school aimed 
to provide regular educational programs and learning activities for all 
PWDs of all ages (Eldamaty, 2004; Figure 2).
In 2006, the foundation of the Children’s Museum in the EMC was 
a giant step forward in acknowledging the fundamental role of the 
museum in educating children of all ages alongside their parents (The 
Egyptian Museum, 2009). LEGO models, replicas, and artifacts were 
attracting children’s attention with their families who searching for an 
out-of-school education (The Egyptian Museum, 2009). Some special 
educational visits targeting SWDs, yet on a small scale, were carried 
out followed by workshops and activities aimed at improving their 
skills and knowledge after their visits (The Egyptian Museum, 2022).
The National Museum of Egyptian Civilization (NMEC), one of 
the main national museums in Egypt, has formulated a policy for the 
development of comprehensive educational programs that target 
pre-school age up to older adults and PWDs (Abdel Moniem, 2005). 
Even though NMEC has opened recently but it was actively involved 
in providing educational programs and hands-on learning activities 
even before its official opening (Aboulnaga et al., 2022). Most recently, 
the NMEC initiate special programs for SWDs and other individuals 
with disabilities in cooperation with some disability-related 
institutions in Egypt (National Museum of Egyptian Civilization-
NMEC, 2021; Figure 3).
The Grand Egyptian Museum (GEM) as a cultural complex and 
global education center for Egyptology is integrating the 
“Edutainment strategy; technological information system” in the 
implementation of the children’s museum (Mansour, 2005; Grand 
Egyptian Museum, 2023b). Multi-media applications and interactive 
FIGURE 1
Educational activities targeting SWDs- the “Edraak Program”, the 
Child Museum of Heliopolis.
FIGURE 2
Touch Tour for Students with Visual Disability at the Egyptian Museum of Cairo.

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
08
frontiersin.org
educational activities were developed in joint teams of experts and 
professionals to increase the educational effectiveness of children/
students of all ages (El Sheikh, 2020; Grand Egyptian Museum, 
2023a). In addition, GEM is designing a variety of educational 
resources to support children’s school curriculums (up to 12 years; 
Grand Egyptian Museum, 2023b). Responding to the needs of 
children with disabilities, the GEM set up an ambitious plan aimed 
at promoting learning opportunities for SWDs and providing 
supportive informal learning materials in collaboration with 
schoolteachers and different disability organizations (Figure  4). 
Further, the GEM is adopting the necessary elements of accessibility 
and universal design standards in the museum building, exhibition 
galleries, and other GEM facilities to facilitate access to all PWDs 
physically and intellectually (Figure 5).
In 2020, for the first time, an administrative department dedicated 
to PWDs has been established within the organizational structure of 
the museums’ sector. It is entitled “The General Administration for 
People with Special Needs” (GAPSNs) and is aimed at improving 
accessibility and providing special programs designed to meet the 
needs of the community of PWDs (Maspero, 2021). A specific unit for 
museum education of PWDs was, therefore, established at each 
museum affiliated with the GAPSNs to promote programs and 
services for PWDs. Undoubtedly, this new administration is asserting 
the responsibilities of the Egyptian museums toward the inclusion of 
PWDs as well as reinforcing their commitment to integrating them 
into society.
5. Methodology and research 
instruments
The research investigates the current practices of Egyptian 
museums towards SWDs and the educational programs that support 
their learning beyond the formal education system. It aimed to assess 
the potential of Egypt’s museums in facilitating learning for the 
SWDs as well as framing their responsibilities in advancing inclusive 
education and supporting the rights of PWDs. It asks two main 
FIGURE 3
Arts and Crafts Activities for SWDs at the National Egyptian of 
Egyptian Civilization.
FIGURE 4
Educational Program for Students with Down Syndrome at the Grand Egyptian Museum. Image reprinted with permission from the Grand Egyptian Museum.

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
09
frontiersin.org
questions: (1) How can Egyptian Museums work within their 
governing systems to support the learning of SWDs beyond their 
formal education system? (2) What are the current challenges 
impacting the practices of inclusive education in Egyptian museums?
The research plan was conducted with an extensive review of 
the literature on education and disabilities in museums in Egypt 
and internationally. The research was then drawn upon existing 
theories on the potentiality of museums’ pedagogical and societal 
tasks in supporting the education of SWDs. A qualitative approach 
was conducted to provide an empirical grounding of the current 
inclusion practices toward PWDs within Egyptian museums and 
explore the challenges and opportunities for facilitating learning for 
SWDs. Finally, field observation was performed.
5.1. Participants
A descriptive study was conducted using semi-structured 
interviews 
with 
twenty-eight 
participants. 
Twenty-three 
representatives were selected from museum institutions and 
administrative departments affiliated with the Ministry of Tourism 
and Antiquities (MoTA)- the leading institution responsible for the 
museums of Egypt. They are varying between seven leaders from a 
variety of institutional departments at MoTA as well as sixteen 
museum professionals ranging between museum educators, heads of 
educational departments, heads of special needs units, along with the 
head of the accessibility team at the GEM. They were selected from 
eight different museums, which are as follows: National Museums 
(EMC, NMEC, GEM, Coptic Museum, Islamic Art Museum), 
Regional Museums (Malawi Museum), Historic House Museums 
(Gayer-Anderson Museum), and the Children’s Civilization and 
Creativity Center (Child Museum) that affiliated to the Association of 
the Heliopolis.
The museums selected for the study are the state museums of 
Egypt that bear significant impacts not only on a national level but 
also on an international scale. They all, except for the child’s museum, 
are affiliated with the MoTA which is responsible for coordinating 
between all the government museums and formulating strategies and 
policies for improving museums’ roles and effectiveness in the service 
of Egyptian society (Prime Ministerial Decree No. 85 of 2019). 
Further, EMC, NMEC, GEM, Coptic Museum, and Islamic Art 
Museum are Egypt’s most visited and influential museums. Examples 
of regional museums were considered to capture impacts in regional 
locations. Also, historic house museums were among the selected 
museums to enrich the study with the challenges of providing 
accessible educational activities in a historic building. At this point, it 
was important for the study to capture inclusive educational practices 
in other types of museums outside the governing framing. Hence, the 
child’s museum was selected to explore the effectiveness of its inclusive 
educational practices.
In an attempt to explore the perceptions of SWDs in the current 
inclusive programs offered by the studied museums, other in-depth 
interviews were conducted with five students with multiple disabilities 
(i.e., three with a visual disability, one with a physical disability, and 
one with mild intellectual disability) from different school stages to 
explore their concerns and advice for promote inclusively educational 
programs that can help in facilitating their learnings. The study’s 
participants from the educational departments helped in identifying 
the students and facilitated communication with them.
Intriguingly, some of the study participants are not only PWDs 
but further, they are key actors in managing the accessibility services, 
planning, and formulating the inclusion programs oriented toward the 
PWDs in the museums’ sector. The director of GAPSNs is himself a 
person with a disability (he is a person who is blind), as well as three 
other museum educators of the interview participants, are also PWDs 
(they have physical and sensory disabilities). This recruitment of 
PWDs in permanent positions in the organizational structure of the 
museums’ sector is not only useful for increasing the inclusion of 
PWDs in the workforce but also comes in response to the necessity of 
reflecting the voices of PWDs and improving their representation in 
the museums’ sector in an attempt to address the interests and needs 
of users with disabilities and enhancing their services and facilities in 
the museum experience. It is worth mentioning here that the above-
mentioned participants were the nucleus of the Museum Education 
Department at the EMC and led several educational programs for 
SWDs since 2004 till the present not only on the scale of EMC but on 
the wider scale of other museums at the MoTA.
FIGURE 5
Testing Hands-On Station by a Person who is blind at the Grand 
Egyptian Museum. Image reprinted with permission from the Grand 
Egyptian Museum.

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
10
frontiersin.org
5.2. Data analysis
A preliminary analysis was conducted in the first section derived 
from the review of the literature review and focused on museums’ 
contribution to informal and non-formal education as well as their 
societal obligation towards advocating the rights of PWDs. As part of 
the study investigation, a thorough analysis of the history of museum 
education in Egypt and the educational practices at Egyptian museums 
was provided to elaborate on the potential of museums to support 
inclusive educational practices.
Then, a comprehensive analysis was undertaken using in-depth 
qualitative interviews combined with observational notes taken 
during the interviews. The practices of the Egyptian museums were 
analyzed and discussed through one-to-one interviews with each of 
the participants virtually using the Zoom platform to assess the 
ongoing educational programs and inclusion practices that target 
PWDs, as well as explore their concerns and advice for promoting 
educational opportunities for SWDs and widening the Egyptian 
museums’ societal tasks to support their rights in inclusive education. 
The interviews were conducted in Arabic since the participants were 
Egyptian museum professionals. It was then transcribed verbatim, 
translated into English, arranged, and categorized according to the 
emergent topics and discussions around barriers to engaging with 
SWDs, restrictive environments, museums’ potential in facilitating 
learning of curriculum content, and possible collaboration and 
opportunities. The collected data was analyzed and sorted according 
to the research scope and aims, the emergent themes in the interviews, 
notes, and video recordings. The questions that were used as the basis 
for the interview are in (Table 1).
5.3. Results and findings
Over the past decades, Egyptian museums have stretched their 
work across several socially purposeful activities targeting the local 
community. Currently, almost all the museums of MoTA have some 
form of educational program or resources oriented toward people 
with disabilities including SWDs. This approach has been supported 
by the establishment of a specialized administrative division in each 
museum affiliated with the GAPSNs and obligated to provide 
educational programs for all PWDs. Prior, these disability-related 
programs were performed under the umbrella of the educational 
sections/departments at museums.
The results of the study revealed that Egyptian museums have 
already contributed to the learning of SWDs through several 
activities and workshops, yet short-term programs and individual 
efforts, but they affirmed the potentiality of Egyptian museums in 
supporting learning beyond the formal education system of the 
state. From the perspective of museum professionals, the study 
witnessed a growing awareness and willingness by the museum staff 
to expand their museum tasks to be more inclusive as voiced in 
many responses including this comment: “There is growing 
attention to the disabled people’s programs at the ministry reflected 
in expanding the collaborative relationships with disabled 
organizations, increasing social programs, and improving the 
accessibility in the museum buildings. In the past, these practices 
were out of our obligations as museum staff.” They are very keen to 
embrace the rights of PWDs, mainly the SWDs, support their 
learning, and contribute to eliminating their exclusionary 
educational practices.
Similarly, the perspective of the SWDs admits the supportive role 
of museums in improving and facilitating their learning. All five 
students agreed that the programs they have experienced at the 
museums contributed effectively to their understanding, knowledge, 
and skills. In this respect, one of the study interviewees, a student with 
a visual disability, has emphasized that the learning programs 
he experienced at the museum have brought additional knowledge to 
his learning process, specifically the touch tour, whether touching 
original artifacts or replicas, he stated.
TABLE 1  Interview guide.
For the museum professionals
	•	 Can you please describe how long you have been involved in providing special 
programs for SWDs?
	•	 Are you receiving any specific training programs for addressing SWDs?
	•	 What kind of programs, workshops, and activities are introduced to SWDs? And 
how do you coordinate with them for the museum visits?
	•	 Are you integrating the SWDs with their peers of non-disabled students in your 
programs/activities? If yes, what challenges do you encounter?
	•	 Who designs these programs and activities? And what learning resources do 
you use? Are you coordinating with their schoolteachers, parents, or specialists 
in disability organizations to identify their educational needs?
	•	 Are the programs linked with the curriculum topics and educational content of 
SWDs? If yes, which grades?
	•	 In your view, what are the current barriers faced by SWDs in their education?
	•	 What types of accessibility services, facilities, and accommodations are currently 
available at your museum?
	•	 Are you collaborating with disability organizations, community groups, schools, 
or other governmental institutions in developing short and long-term programs 
and services for the benefit of SWDs? Are there any partnerships with these 
organizations?
	•	 How far do you think the Egyptian museums can support the education of 
SWDs and facilitate their learning?
	•	 Do you have any suggestions or advice for how museums foster the inclusion of 
SWDs and facilitate their learning beyond the education system?
	•	 Is there anything else you would like to add?
For the students with disabilities
	•	 Did you visit any museums before? If yes, which museums, and how many 
times?
	•	 Were you alone or part of a group from school, or other? Please, specify
	•	 Did you engage in museum educational programs? If yes, which kind of 
programs, workshops, and activities have you experienced?
	•	 Were the provided programs and activities related to your curriculum topics at 
schools? if yes, which topics
	•	 Did these programs support your understanding of the school curriculum and 
add to your skills?
	•	 Did you face any type of barriers or obstacles during the museum visit or 
educational programs? If yes, which kind of barriers
	•	 On a scale from one to ten, how far do the museum’s educational programs 
you experienced facilitate your learning beyond school?
	•	 Do you have any suggestions for museums to improve their educational 
programs offered to you?
	•	 Is there anything else you would like to add?

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
11
frontiersin.org
“The touch tour helped me to complete my mental perception of 
many historical topics related to school curricula, such as the sphinx 
which I had no idea what meant to be a lion’s body and pharaoh’s head. 
Now I realized what it is and how it has been created in the past.”
Another student with mild intellectual disabilities highlighted 
how the museum activities increased her performance in art activities-
drawing and painting- and allow displaying her drawing together with 
her colleagues’ drawings in an art exhibition inside the museum:
“I liked these activities a lot because I can mix the colors and 
create better-colored drawings. The museum program raised the 
quality of my paintings and drawings. I was very happy when I saw my 
drawings displayed at the museum.”
Undoubtedly, Egyptian museums possessed some of the essential 
factors needed to provide meaningful learning opportunities for 
SWDs and stimulate their abilities and social skills. These factors are 
included but not limited to; museum-collection that is used as starting 
point for dialogue-based learning, curricula-related objects, some 
audio-visual services, art and crafts activities, fun field trips, 
performances, drama and theatre, outreach-educational programs, 
not to mention the desire and moral responsibility of the staff among 
other museum pedagogical tools.
Nonetheless, the study also revealed multiple barriers at the 
Egyptian museums and challenges that directly impact practices of 
inclusive education. Several classifications worldwide examined and 
classified barriers to disability and inclusions of the PWDs (Leahy and 
Ferri, 2022). Following the world report on disability, the main 
barriers that hinder the inclusion of PWDs are recognized as (1) 
inadequate policies and standards, (2) negative attitudes, (3) lack of 
provision of services, (4) problems with service delivery, (5) 
inadequate funding, (6) lack of accessibility, (7) lack of consultation 
and involvement, and (8) lack of data and evidence (World Health 
Organization and World Bank, 2011). The study used this context to 
analyze and sort the barriers thematically as emerged from the 
answers of the interview respondents, which can be categorized as the 
following (see Table 2).
5.4. Constraints related to organizational 
and legal aspects
Most of the respondents marked concerns about constraints 
related to formalized coordination with schools of inclusive education 
as well as partnerships with the Ministry of Education to develop a 
regulatory framework allowing direct arrangements with schools, 
consolidating knowledge with the school-based curricula, and thus 
more effective and regular programs designed for SWDs (see Table 2). 
Unsurprisingly, there have yet to be any institutional partnerships 
developed between the Ministry of Education and MoTA targeting 
inclusive practice for SWDs.
While two museum educators have reported that they coordinate 
with surrounding schools of disability education, the majority 
indicated that it is preferable to communicate with disability 
organizations and civil society associations, for the ease of security 
procedures, as these bodies are taking the responsibility for arranging 
with the concerned schools to institute the planned museum visits. 
One of the participants voiced a strong belief that disability 
organizations are more supportive of the museums’ programs towards 
SWDs than schools stating that “Communicating with disability 
organizations to organize learning programs for SWDs is much easier 
and faster than schools. They are keener than schools in cooperating 
with the museums.”
Even though such arrangements, that have taken place by 
these bodies, are alleviating the burden of time delay, and 
facilitating access to the museum programs, it resulted in school 
visits of different educational levels and sometimes even varied 
impairments at the same time. In this line, all the museum 
educators stated that they face a lot of problems when conducting 
programs for SWDs of different levels of education or disabilities 
as this would compromise the effectiveness and the quality of the 
provided programs, as one of the participants stated “Do you think 
the inclusive program can be successful with large numbers of 
students with different types of disabilities at the same time? This 
is affecting the quality of the program and compromising the 
ability of the students to learn.”
In the context of the structured information-based programs 
and their linkage with the school curricula, most of the participants 
assured of their keenness to provide activities and workshops related 
to the curriculum topics and educational content of SWDs yet 
missing a workable model with curriculum guidelines to be used as 
a framework for the educational plans (i.e., curricular topics for each 
grade, instructions, tool/materials used, assessment). One 
participant commented, “We do not have yet a template with 
instructions in the museum sector to be used in the planning of the 
educational programs.”
However, participants indicated that they consider the 
curriculum of all three education stages, namely, primary, 
preparatory, and secondary, with extra attention being given to the 
primary and preparatory. However, these are individual efforts with 
very limited opportunities to coordinate and engage with 
schoolteachers in designing these programs and activities or 
proposing any pedagogical plans to help the successful inclusion of 
SWDs, “having regular communication channels with the 
schoolteachers for the pre-planning of the museum programs would 
definitely improve the quality of the programs and educational 
activities and contribute to a better learning experience for the 
SWDs. But we do not have yet any formalized cooperation with 
schoolteachers,” commented one of the participants.
Further, the majority have raised concerns about not having 
access to the state curriculum instructions to help develop more 
effective programs “Unfortunately, we do not have access to the state 
resources of inclusive education.” This is due to the lack of formalized 
arrangements with the Ministry of Education and its affiliated schools 
and concerned departments.
5.5. Accessibility barriers; physical, 
intellectual, and attitudinal
Most of the museums in Egypt, mainly the national museums, 
are difficult to be visited by people with physical disabilities due to 
many architectural barriers and obstacles (Zakaria, 2020). Since the 
foundation of the GAPSNs in 2020, several accessibility audits were 
carried out to assess the museums’ buildings, exhibition areas, and 
facilities to improve accessibility accommodations for PWDs 
(Figure 6). In response to this commitment, guidance on accessibility 
recommendations and local guidelines were formulated by the 

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
12
frontiersin.org
GAPSNs in cooperation with experts from the concerned disability 
organizations.1
Despite the recent efforts that have been made by the MoTA for 
improving accessibility and developing services for PWDs in Egyptian 
museums and archeological sites (such as accessible toilets, ramps, 
elevators, etc.) (Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, 2021) but there 
are still major barriers reflected in the participants’ responses as they 
have indicated that the current physical environment and infrastructure 
conditions have limited accessibility for SWDs. As emerged from the 
1  These guidelines are still in the phase of formulation and development. 
They have yet to be published formally by the MoTA.
interview respondents, the movement inside exhibition galleries and 
museum facilities is inaccessible, not only for students with physical 
impairments but also for blind individuals. This was grounded on the 
accessibility audit guidelines provided by the GAPSNs.
In this respect, one of the students echoed this concern stating that 
“I was tired on the guided tour. I encountered some physical barriers in 
accessing the toilet and some display cases. Even though the toilet itself 
was accessible and usable for me but the way leading to was very difficult.”
“Some wheelchairs have been donated by NGOs, but still very few,” 
commented one of the interviewees of the museum professionals. 
Some enhancements have been implemented by some international 
organizations, such as UNESCO in the case of the Gayer-Anderson 
Museum, to improve accessibility accommodations and visitor services 
TABLE 2  Barriers sorted as emerged from the answers of the interview respondents (museum professionals).
Museums 
reported 
barriers
Category
Types of barriers
Examples of participants’ quotes
Six museums
Organizational and 
legal constraints
	•	 Lack of partnership with the 
Ministry of Education (MoE)
	•	 Poor arrangements with schools/
classes of inclusive education; most 
school visits are arranged with 
disability organizations
	•	 Lack of a workable model and 
established regulatory framework 
between museums and schools
	•	 Limited opportunities to engage 
with schoolteachers in planning the 
learning programs and developing 
curricular related- materials
	•	 Lack of access to the state 
curriculum and instructional 
strategies
	•	 Difficulties in obtaining educational 
material
“I think, to best achieve a successful learning environment for SWDs we need 
more flexibility in addressing schools of Special Education directly and plans 
in advance with the teachers. This is very difficult for us since we do not have 
any direct communication with schools as this requires a lot of administrative 
papers and security approvals”
“GAPSNs has a list of most the schools of special education and public 
schools with classes of inclusive education. We usually contact the schools 
before the beginning of the school year, but not all the schools are 
responding. This is due to the lack of accessible transport, cost, and support 
by schools to reach the museum venues. In addition to several administrative 
and security procedures that need to be taken by both sides; the museum 
sector and schools administration”
“Between 2005 and 2010, the Supreme Council of Antiquities (now MoTA) 
provided buses to transport SWDs regularly from schools to the museums, 
mainly to EMC. But after 2011, this service has been stopped due to financial 
constraints”
“We do not have access to the schools’ curricula nor formalized arrangements 
with the schoolteachers in designing the programs or proposing the 
pedagogical plans. Some museum educators are indeed in touch with special 
education teachers, but not in an official way and most of the resources they 
obtained are from individual research”
“We hope to have communication channels with the teachers to design more 
effective and organized learning programs that better meet the demands of 
the students with special needs”
“There are many constraints in approaching the schools of SWDs, therefore 
we prefer to contact the disability organizations to arrange the museum visit. 
This is resulted, sometimes, in large numbers of students with different types 
of disabilities at the same time which is affected the quality of provided 
programs or workshops”
“I do communicate regularly with two of the surrounding schools with SWDs 
but it is indeed very exhausting and consumes a lot of time to finalize the 
required paperwork, get the approval of security, and initiate the programs”
“Due to the lack of direct coordination with the MoE and the General 
Directorate for Special Education, we have many school visits from disability 
organizations, for ease of procedures. Due to the large numbers of students 
from different classes (sometimes reaching 40–50 students), we face a lot of 
challenges with the students to respond to their needs and deliver the 
planned museum programs.”
(Continued)

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
13
frontiersin.org
TABLE 2  (Continued)
Museums 
reported 
barriers
Category
Types of barriers
Examples of participants’ quotes
Eight museums
Accessibility barriers
Physical barriers:
	•	 Lack of accessibly transport and 
support to reach museum venue
	•	 Physical barriers in accessing 
museum buildings (entrances, 
ramps, elevators, toilets, etc.)
	•	 Inaccessible exhibitions galleries 
and facilities
	•	 Lack of sufficient seating
Intellectual barriers: 
(for students with vision impairments)
	•	 Limited Brail texts (labels, panels, 
catalogues)
	•	 Lack of tactile elements (maps, 
illustrations, graphics, 
diagrams, etc.)
	•	 Lack of large prints and clear 
accessible texts (for 
visually impaired).
(For students with hearing 
impairments)
	•	 Lack of captioned videos in 
exhibition galleries (only 
Facebook Pages)
	•	 Lack of videos with sign language 
(only Facebook Pages)
	•	 Lack of assistive listening devices
	•	 Shortage of sign language 
interpreters (in-house staff)
	•	 Lack of multi-media guides with 
captioned videos or sign language
Attitudinal barriers:
	•	 Negative attitudes and behaviors by 
some museum staff
	•	 Difficulties and pressure in 
delivering the inclusive programs
	•	 Isolating some SWDs from 
the program
	•	 Stigma surrounding SWDs.
“We do not have a specialized equipped room for conducting the learning 
programs. We usually use the museum outdoors/gardens for conducting the 
activities or inside the exhibition galleries.”
“Students with physical disabilities encounter stairs inside the exhibition 
galleries, inaccessible displayed objects that are out of their range of eyesight, 
as well as limited, sometimes inaccessible, spaces between showcases, to 
move freely around in tours.”
“Ramps are either too steep or lack handrails.”
“Even though we had some renovations in the past decade to include 
accessible services for visitors with physical difficulties such as accessible 
toilets, elevators, ramps, and suitable sun-shaded facilities in the garden for 
educational activities, some elevators are not operated (need maintenance) 
while entrance ramps do not meet the international recommendation of 
universal design as it lacks grabbing hands and appropriate level landing on 
top and bottom.”
“Unfortunately, not all the exhibitions have Braille texts, only a few objects, 
mainly the masterpieces artifacts”
“We only have Braille labels; we are planning to have in the near future 
brochure and catalogue with Braille texts”
“We have yet to produce any large prints texts nor tactile diagrams/mages.”
“Most of the students who are blind are enjoying touching the replicas and 
engaging with the process of talking. Some of the utilized replicas are indeed 
very relevant to the topics of students’ curriculum, especially history and 
social studies, but we still need more replicas to cover other important topics 
and enrich the educational experience of the blind students”
“We do not have tactile architectural diagrams or graphics since we lack in 
Egypt companies/producers that manufacturing these tactile resources. 
Instead, we are utilizing models and handling replicas in educational 
programs. Sometimes we are using reproductions to some work of arts in 
2-D with raised reliefs, but still on a small scale”
“Unlike the GEM, we have yet to include any application that enables audio 
descriptions for museum artifacts”
“It is important to realize that every deaf student has different levels of 
deafness. We do not have, till present, any hearing aids system, or 
technological tools similar to what western museums have utilized for 
catering to visitors with hearing impairments”
“Except for the new museums projects only, we do not have audio-visual 
displays or digital media inside exhibition galleries to provide captions or 
sign language for people with hearing impairments”
“We do not have sign language interpreters among the museum staff”
“The main barriers facing the SWDs are attitudinal whether from their peers 
of the non-disabled students in the integration programs or by some of the 
museum staff that perceive SWDs as slow learners”
“Some colleagues have a negative attitude or nervosa toward the whole 
process, I think this is due to a lack of enough awareness among them”
“Sadly, I witnessed some situations where some SWDs were positioned as 
inferior and stigmatized by my colleagues.”
(Continued)

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
14
frontiersin.org
(Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, 2022). The development of these 
services is still restricted only to the ground floor and accessible toilets 
with no access to the museum building and the other floors. One of the 
students reported: “Even though the museum staff used a virtual tour 
via mobile to show us the rest of the museum galleries on the second 
floor, I wished the museum has an accessible elevator to enable me to 
explore the second floor and roof myself.”
Some of the museums lacked dedicated spaces or galleries that can 
be easily reachable by SWDs for educational purposes. As for the 
entrance ramps, “they are not compatible with the principle of 
universal design in terms of size, sloping degree, and handrails,” as 
highlighted by one of the participants.
On an intellectual and sensory level, most of the museums have 
incorporated a modest level of intellectual accessibility that varies 
from one museum to another. Braille labels, a touch tour, and replicas 
models are among the common services that target blind people in the 
majority of museums. Some museums such as EMC have recently 
adopted electronic audio devices accompanying the Braille labels to 
provide more engagement with the museum’s key artifacts (Ministry 
of Tourism and Antiquities, 2019).
TABLE 2  (Continued)
Museums 
reported 
barriers
Category
Types of barriers
Examples of participants’ quotes
Six museums
Challenges in the 
realization of the 
curricula-based 
programs
	•	 Limited structural materials 
and resources
	•	 Lack of long-term programs/yearly 
regular programs
	•	 Lack of knowledge of the best 
practices examples
	•	 Lack of coordination and 
networking with key actors (i.e., 
school leaders, teachers, and 
education experts)
	•	 Lack of practical training in 
formulating the curricula-
based programs
	•	 The lack of specialized staff and 
workload.
“The museum collections do link to many curriculum topics, not only history 
and social studies, as some assumed, but also more Arabic, science, and 
English lessons. So, what we need is more specific information on the school 
curriculum and more consultation and cooperation with the schools.”
“We have very limited pedagogical tools and resources”
“Museum sector have yet to produce any manual aligned to the state 
instructions of inclusive education with methodologies, tools, focused 
curriculum topics, and artifacts used to best achieve the goals of the 
educational programs”
“The museums need more practical arrangements with school instructors 
and teachers with a lot of pre-visit preparations to provide real effective 
programs for SWDs”
“We need to create instructional materials with the involvement with the 
museum collections in consultation with schools to be shared and 
mainstream among schools and museums”
“Museum educators and classroom instructors/teachers need to work 
together to develop best practices in the lessons plan that are linked to 
museums collections and exhibitions and identify the tools and resources 
needed for fostering active learning experiences for SWDs”
“I think, the basic knowledge we have is not enough to develop actual 
educational content meet the needs of SWDs. We need practical knowledge 
and be more actively involved with the schoolteachers in designing lessons 
and tricks.”
Six museums
Lack of appropriate 
training programs
	•	 Lack of efficient training
	•	 Skills shortages
	•	 Lack of need assessment
	•	 Lack of staff training plan.
“I am facing several problems in my work with SWDs, I wish I were aware 
more of what I am dealing with, to be able to overcome the problems and get 
better results”
“love my work with SWDs. I want to provide good service for them. 
I am trying to attend most of the training programs at the MoTA, but they 
are not efficient and do not enough”
“Due to the lack of efficient knowledge by some of the museum educator, 
some time the workshop is not suitable for the type of impairment”
“We need specialized programs in psychological rehabilitation to achieve 
better results with the students.”
Seven museums
Financial constraints
	•	 Lack of state budget
	•	 Limited Funding opportunities
	•	 Limited tools and learning 
resources.
“The tasks and activities of the GAPSNs are grouped with the functions of the 
Museum Education Departments to receive tools and ores for conducting the 
workshops, as you can see, we do have limited tools and materials”
“We have limited funding opportunities which without no doubt affects the 
implementation of the programs”
“The learning materials used in the workshops are provided by the museum 
educators themselves or the disability organizations, since there is specific 
budget yet”
“Sometimes we asked the concerned disability organizations to provide 
museums with the workshops materials.”

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
15
frontiersin.org
Aside from this, there are limited Braille texts and provisions. 
Only one of eight museums-Gayer Anderson Museum- has reported 
that it developed a Museum Catalogue in Braille in cooperation with 
the Blind Association as stated by one of the participants: “We have 
developed a Braille Catalogue for the first time to be distributed to 
schools of special education which faces difficulties in visiting the 
museum.” There is also an absence of any tactile elements such as 
maps or illustrations, no large prints, labels/panels font size is very 
difficult to read by visually or partially impaired students as well 
lacking contrasting colors. One of the partially sighted students said 
that “the labels and panels texts are too small and too difficult to 
read, and there is no brochure with large prints.” Interestingly, the 
EMC has recently created a tactile path for visually impaired people 
in cooperation with the State Tactile Museum of Omero (Italy)2 
together with special audio pens for explaining the artifacts on the 
route, but as reported by one of the interviewees” it is the only 
museum that has a tactile path for the blind people and audio pens 
for people with visual disability” (State Tactile Museo Omero, 2023; 
Figure 7).
2  The State Tactile Museo Omero is currently involved in many projects with 
the Egyptian Museums to support accessible services for visually impaired 
users, such as tactile paths, tactile and sensory books for schools, (etc.). In 
addition, specific training programs for people with visual impairment were 
delivered by the museum for both museum staff and teachers (State Tactile 
Museo Omero, 2023).
As for students with hearing disabilities, the Egyptian museums 
have yet to take access measures for them, except for captioned videos 
or videos supported with sign language that are available only on the 
museum’s Facebook pages, as highlighted by the interview 
respondents. “We have this service available only on the Facebook 
page of the museum with the help of some experts from disability 
organizations that provided the sign language interpreters.” Another 
participant expressed how the positive impact of this service online 
stated that: “We have developed specific educational content in form 
of episodes on the Facebook page called “tales of our ancestors” 
supported with sign language to cater to students with hearing loss. 
They were actively engaged with it, and we received very positive 
feedback.” Another participant commented: “We have created 
partnerships with several deaf associations in Egypt to support our 
programs toward visitors with hearing disabilities.”
Museum-led tours for students with hearing impairments are 
presented only by sign interpreters that accompanied students from 
disability organizations. The study revealed that museum educators 
have limited knowledge of sign language and are not able to handle 
the tour guide and other-related programs without getting assistance 
from the concerned disability organizations or schools. In this 
concern, “We have this service available only on the Facebook page of 
the museum with the help of some experts from disability 
organizations that provided the sign language interpreters.” Another 
participant expressed how the positive impact of this service online 
stated that “We have developed specific educational content in form 
of episodes on the Facebook page called “tales of our ancestors” 
supported with sign language to cater to students with hearing loss. 
They were actively engaged with it, and we received very positive 
feedback.” Another participant commented, “We have created 
partnerships with several deaf associations in Egypt to support our 
programs toward visitors with hearing disabilities.”
Based on the approved architecture design of the GEM that was 
constructed by the Irish firm Heneghan Peng Architects, the GEM has 
integrated an adequate accessibility approach and universal design for 
PWDs based on British standards as stated by the one of study 
participants (Grand Egyptian Museum, 2023a). Accessibility and 
inclusion are inherent in the design of exhibitions, programs, and 
services to be accessible to all visitors, physically and intellectually 
without the need for adaptation or specialized design. Special 
companies- such as Acciona- were used to implement a variety of 
accessibility elements at the GEM, i.e., Tactile and interactive exhibit 
elements, hands-on stations, replicas, tactile routes, audio descriptions, 
assistive listening devices for the deaf and hard of hearing, captioning 
and subtitles and much more are services recognized at the GEM for 
the inclusion of PWDs (Acciona, 2020). Most recently, collaboration 
was made between the GEM and National Council for Persons with 
Disabilities to assess accessibility accommodations to best serve the 
need of the community of PWDs in Egypt.3
3  In accordance with article 33 of the CRPD, Egypt established “the National 
Council for Disability Affairs” in 2012. This council was replaced in 2019 by 
“The National Council for People with Disabilities” in accordance with Egyptian 
Law No. 10 to be a council with advisory, coordination, and supervisory roles 
together with national committees and civil society organizations to ensure 
the rights of PWDs in all fields (State Information Service, 2019).
FIGURE 6
Assessing the accessibility services (brail labels) for the visually 
impaired at the Islamic art museum.

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
16
frontiersin.org
Interestingly, the study observed that the majority of museums set 
up special programs for students with developmental disabilities, such 
as Down Syndrome and Autism, in which they work closely with 
concerned schools and cooperate with associations for developmental 
disabilities in developing the appropriate programs or services.
The Child’s Museum, for instance, has developed partnerships 
with several disability-related organizations and schools to design 
effective programs targeting children with developmental disabilities 
which are the center of the museum’s vision towards SWDs as 
described by one of the respondents “social interaction, learning by 
doing and collaborations hand-to-hand with schools of special needs 
and disability organizations hold a central role in the museum agenda 
towards SWDs, mainly students with learning and developmental 
disabilities.” Social interaction is central to visitors with intellectual 
and developmental impairments (Gratton, 2020). These programs, 
therefore, aim to stimulate students’ interactions, advance their skills, 
and improve their intellectual, social, and cognitive abilities, as 
highlighted by one of the participants “We are adopting activities-
related learning designed to stimulate the students’ interactions 
through ‘learning by doing’. We  have a specific team of social 
specialists who studied psychiatry, in addition to fresh graduates of 
the Faculty of Education and Kindergarten, to facilitate active 
experiential learning programs.”
In doing so, the museum is utilizing curriculum related-content, 
hands-on activities, tactile activities, experimentations, etc., that are 
positively affecting their learning opportunities. This includes the 
“Edraak Program” that is stated above. It is a long-term program 
available the whole time of the year, unlike the other programs 
provided by the museums affiliated with the MoTA, which are 
available only on special occasions and events with fewer educational 
activities and resources. Perhaps, this is due to the fact that all the 
programs provided by MoTA’s museums are free of charge while the 
“Edraak” and other similar programs at the Child’s Museum are 
required fees to cover the cost of the programs and maintain 
their sustainability.
In this respect, many participants of the MoTA’s museums have 
voiced that they are facing a lot of difficulties in addressing children 
with developmental disabilities and facilitating their learning. This 
occurred especially in the integration programs that combined both 
children with developmental disabilities and their peers of 
non-disabled. Participants stated that they cannot manage the group 
which, in many cases, resulted in isolating the children by their 
teachers and leaving them behind in the galleries without a 
particular task. Given the significant challenges faced in practice, 
some of the participants indicated that there are major attitudinal 
and emotional barriers facing SWDs from both their teachers/
facilitators and several museum staff, as stated by one of the students 
“I felt that attending the educational program at the museum was 
difficult for me. I  felt bad when I  was avoided by some of the 
museum staff who led the tour guide.” In this view, another student 
stated that “I faced a negative attitude from some of the museum 
security.” Some of the museum educators have explicitly reported 
some negative attitudes and behaviors of their colleagues during the 
programs, which are considered major barriers to the inclusion 
of SWDs.
5.6. Challenges in the realization of the 
curricula-based programs
As stated above, there is a lack of cooperation between the 
museums and schoolteachers in the planning and designing of the 
curricula-based programs which are, as agreed by all the participants, 
one of the main important factors for the quality of the programs and 
improving the learning experience of the SWDs. Several museum 
personnel pointed out that the museum exhibitions and collections 
had great relevance to many curricular topics of different school 
stages, but there is a lack of instructional materials, tools, and 
resources to provide more effective programs in favor of SWDs. The 
curricula-based educational content used for teaching SWDs was 
described by one of the museum educators as” weak and lacked 
needed resources that affected the quality of the programs.”
Part of the challenges highlighted by the participants was a lack of 
knowledge of the best practice examples in realizing the educational 
programs for SWDs or models with key elements that need to 
be considered in the planning of the content, process, and used tools, 
and thus “developing original museum-educational programs for 
SWDs” as added one of the respondents. This is due to the fact that 
there is no practical training provided to museum educators in 
planning the learning programs for SWDs, as the study witnessed.
Also, there is a lack of regular long-term programs as expressed 
by some of the museum personnel “These programs can be classified 
as events rather than well-crafted long-term educational programs 
especially since some of these activities and workshops are taking 
place on special occasions, such as celebrating the blind and white 
sticks, or the international day for disability (etc.) and not available 
during the whole year regularly.”
Another participant commented on this issue “Museum 
professionals should take part in advance in the planning and 
developing of SWDs curricula in cooperation with the Ministry of 
Education and create effective educational resources based on the 
museum’s collections.” Another highlighted the positive impact of 
museums’ activities on advancing the SWDs social skills: and abilities: 
“The museums are organizing several multicultural events and 
activities for SWDs including art and crafts workshops, performances, 
drama, competitions, marathons (etc.) that allow them to discover 
their utmost potential and utilize their diverse strengths and abilities 
to engage and win.”
FIGURE 7
Testing the tactile path for the visually impaired by museum educator 
from the visually impaired school at the Egyptian museum of Cairo.

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
17
frontiersin.org
The lack of specialized staff and workload were also reported as a 
barrier to the inclusion of SWDs. One of the participants stressed the 
shortage of staff as one of the constraints they faced in the 
implementation of the programs. Others assured the necessity of 
hiring teams from specialized faculties such as the Faculty of 
Education and Faculty of Arts, namely the departments of psychology 
and sociology, to provide the needed guidance and advice for the 
successful inclusion of SWDs into the Egyptian museums.
5.7. Lack of appropriate training programs
Training museum personnel to work with PWDs should be a 
museum-wide commitment to ensure access and inclusion to all on 
an equal basis. Training is needed to support staff with knowledge of 
accessibility issues, disability etiquette, and respectable language in 
addressing and communicating PWDs (Braden, 2016). In addition, 
raise their awareness about the behaviors and needs of PWDs to 
embrace them and promote their engagement with the museum 
programs. As appeared in some of the interviewees’ responses, there 
were some negative attitudes and behaviors identified by both 
museum educators and SWDs during the programs.
While adopting training programs at MoTA is important recently, 
to the extent that this results in a checklist approach in different 
departments to addressing attitudinal barriers and raising the 
awareness of the MoTA staff in different museums and archeological 
sites with disability issues and communication with people of different 
disabilities, it is unlikely to be sufficient.
Museum educators need more focused training which is, as 
agreed by most of the participants, “limited at the MoTA and does not 
meet our needs.” It was agreed by the majority of museum 
professionals that there are difficulties in dealing with SWDs during 
the educational programs due to a lack of specialized training, as 
stated by one of the participants, “We are encountering some 
difficulties in dealing with SWDs which made us more conscious of 
the necessity of having more focused skills training to meet what 
we truly need.” One of the museum professionals commented, “The 
experience of dealing with PWDs, and working closely with them and 
their organizations made me realize that I have deficits and need to 
improve my skills to provide better programs.”
According to the obtained results, there is no Need Assessment at 
the MoTA to determine the exact needs and gaps before providing 
disability training that is delivered by multiple centralized departments 
at the MoTA (i.e., Centralized Department of Training, Cultural 
Development Department, General Administration for the 
Development of Visitor Services at Archeological Sites and Museums). 
Further, “there is a lack of strategic training elaborating on who needs 
what” as stated by one of the museum professionals.
Despite that, all the museums of the study have indicated 
partnerships and cooperation with universities and disability-related- 
organizations for capacity building of museum staff in disability 
awareness training and basic communication in dealing with PWDs, 
there was a consensus among participants that this training is not 
sufficient with very limited opportunities to learn and practice new 
skills in addressing PWDs. Some participants criticize the training 
stating that” It is more of awareness lectures than a specialized training 
program with clarified objectives, methodology, and learning outputs.” 
Others highlighted the time allowed for these programs as “very 
limited time with only 2–5 days of lecture programs, which are not 
enough to gain appropriate knowledge.” Another added to this 
criticism, stating “There is no training toolkit, written guidance, or any 
helpful resources for obtaining new skills.” Comments of one 
participant highlight this point, “These kinds of training would be of 
importance for the staff of security and information desks to raise 
their awareness of the appropriate way in communication with PWDS, 
while the museums’ educators are required to have more specialized 
training to enable them to facilitate learning for SWDs.”
5.8. Financial constraints
Considerable evidence in the responses of the participants 
indicated that they have very confined financial resources in practicing 
inclusive programs for SWDs. This is due to the fact that the 
organizational structure of the General Administration for People 
with Special Needs (GAPSNs) is still under the approval of the State 
Central Agency for Organization and Administration, thereby, does 
not receive yet any allocated funds from the public funding of the state.
Most of the museum professionals have reported that they lacked 
learning materials that support their programs due to the limited 
budget. One commented, “It is very difficult to provide an inclusion 
program without a reasonable budget.” The majority have indicated 
that they bring the materials and tools with their own money to 
implement the programs adequately otherwise the programs will 
be limited only to the guided tour and oral interpretation which are, 
as emphasized by many, not efficient for the success of the programs. 
A participant said, “Sometimes we asked the concerned disability 
organizations to provide museums with the workshops materials.” 
Some others added, “They have very innovative ideas to enrich the 
programs with explanatory materials and useful elements that can 
effectively support the curriculum content but unfortunately they 
lacked the budget and resources to invest in SWDs programs.”
6. Discussion
Undoubtedly, there are strong willingness and endeavor from the 
Egyptian museums to expand their roles in the education of SWDs 
and support their learning experience. In the past few years, Egyptian 
museums have increasingly promoted several educational programs 
and activities aimed to improve the learning of SWDs beyond their 
schools, taking into account curricula and school lessons. All of the 
analyzed museums assured the use of museum collections and 
exhibitions to develop more curriculum-based educational programs 
and promote more learning opportunities for SWDs- yet with limited 
resources and funds. Despite these limitations in program-related 
resources and services, the impact of these programs is of great 
significance for the learning of SWDs and offers them a higher level 
of enjoyment and social interaction. “Teaching methods in schools are 
very traditional and focus more on facts and information,” highlighted 
one of the museum professionals. While museums as non-formal 
learning institutions are adopting different ways to provide exciting 
stimulating learning for all students including those with disabilities 
(Falk et al., 2006). In this view, another museum educator commented, 
“These programs are of great importance and bring a lot of enjoyment 
and joy to ordinary students, let alone students with disabilities.”

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
18
frontiersin.org
Also, all activities of arts and crafts activities, drama and theater 
performances, and marathons are also recognized as potentially 
important. They provide great opportunities for the SWDs to 
improve their social interaction and strengthen their abilities, as 
stressed by one of the students “It is always a lot of fun, doing things 
by hands. I do not want to end the art drawings. I want to spend 
more time at the museum. My peers and I are very happy with the 
drawing activities and pottery making. We  have learned a lot.” 
Another student added “The photography programs at the museum 
made me happier, I learned a lot and gained skills. I took several 
photos of Mohamed Ali Pasha (the viceroy of Egypt). His photo was 
on many exhibition items. It was the same photo used on the cover 
of my history schoolbook. I shared these photos with my family and 
on my Facebook page.” Hence, these programs affirmed that the 
museums are not only supporting only SWDs’ learning opportunities 
but further improving their abilities, skills, and social integration 
in society.
In doing so, the Egyptian museums are cooperating with several 
concerned institutions - from disability, schools, and universities to 
international museums, in most cases developing long-term 
cooperation with disability organizations to provide consultancy and 
facilitate museum visits, programs, and staff training. Since the 2020s, 
in alignment with the foundation GAPSNs, there has been a 
remarkable improvement in accessibility accommodations and 
services for PWDs in museums. A lot of changes and improvements 
have happened only in a period of 3 years, which can be considered an 
indicator of the expected pace of development in the services of PWDs 
in general and the inclusive education of SWDs, in particular. This 
ambitious approach emphasizes the potentiality of the museums in 
embracing the inclusion of SWDs as well as reflects their commitment 
to providing more opportunities for meaningful learning and social 
interaction with SWDs.
As obtained from the study results, MoTA’s museums are 
constrained by several barriers that hamper the progress of the 
inclusive education of SWDs. From the infrastructure conditions, 
limited budget, accessibility barriers, and lack of adequate services and 
efficient staff training to the absence of partnerships with the Ministry 
of Education and the affiliated inclusive schools and classes, which as 
highlighted by most of the participants is a significant barrier.
The current legal framework does not recognize museums as 
direct actors in the educational and social development of SWDs 
beyond their cultural role. Thereby, they are not included among the 
concerned governmental institutions responsible for the inclusive 
education of SWDs. An examination of the Egyptian disability-related 
law reveals that the governmental bodies that are responsible for 
promoting and facilitating learning to SWDs are the Ministry of 
Education and Technical Education, in cooperation with the 
Ministries of Social Solidarity, Communications and Information 
Technology, and Civil Society Organizations (Law no. 10 of the year 
2018, article no. 14). Subsequently, the commitment and capabilities 
to practice inclusive education and promote learning for SWDs are 
situated among the responsibilities of the afore-stated ministries with 
accessing to the state funding to fostering services for SWDs regularly. 
This reveals, on the one hand, the lack of recognition of the societal 
and pedagogical roles of museums and their possibilities in supporting 
the inclusive education of SWDs, while on the other hand means that 
museums encounter difficulties in accessing state funding for 
consolidating long-term educational programs for SWDs.
Despite this limited investment by the concerned authorities to 
involve museums in the practices of inclusive education, Egyptian 
museums -as non-formal educational institutions and social agencies- 
have social responsibilities towards supporting the rights of SWDs in 
compliance with the Egyptian 2030 sustainable development. They 
contribute to the learning of SWDs, yet small-scale programs and 
individual efforts, but they are already engaged in active inclusive 
practices that address the learning of SWDs and have a strong 
willingness and enthusiasm to improve it.
7. Limitations of the study and 
opportunities for future directions
Several limitations need to consider when interpreting the study 
findings. First, the study was constrained by a limited window of 
opportunity for the data collection on the SWDs, their numbers, and 
their types of disabilities. Further, the number of study participants 
from SWDs is very small and does not acknowledge their differences. 
The data collected is, thereby, not representative of the whole SWDs 
in the Egyptian population. Second, despite covering a wide range of 
different museum practices for SWDs in MoTA’s museums that 
represent the mandate, principles, and strategic vision of managing 
and developing the museums of Egypt. The studied museums should 
be  considered as a snapshot rather than a comprehensive 
representation of the various museums’ inclusive practices across the 
country. Finally, it should be recognized that the obtained responses 
from the study’s participants, namely the museum professionals, can 
be biased by their museum institutions, their understanding and 
perception towards PWDs, or by other variable factors beyond the 
research questions.
Nevertheless, the present study can serve as a basis for further 
studies addressing the role of Egyptian museums in supporting the 
education of SWDs. Also, it can contribute to future action planning 
concerning inclusive education and instructional strategies toward 
improving the learning environment of SWDs and identifying the 
barriers they face.
The inclusion of PWDs is a central topic in the 2030 vision of 
Egypt, social agenda, and strategies. It requires collaborations, 
partnerships, and synergies at different levels and settings of society 
to ensure the successful inclusion of SWDs alongside social policies 
addressing their rights. Since Inclusive education is a relatively new 
practice in Egypt that has been incorporated into the responsibilities 
of the Ministry of Education and its related subsidiaries, it needs 
major policies and social reforms to reach true inclusion.
The museums of Egypt, if recognized by the government as critical 
actors in the educational development of SWDs, can contribute widely 
to the implementation of inclusive education. As mentioned, museums 
as centers for life-long learning and non-formal learning institutions 
possess a lot of potential through their collections, programs, and 
activities that can be a strong foundation for developing curriculum-
based educational programs and activities in collaboration with the 
schools. This dimension of museum programs and activities needs 
legal solutions for supporting such educational programs and funding 
for the adoption of long-term policies aimed at eliminating barriers 
faced by SWDs as included in the CRPD and the new legislation of 
disability rights. In doing so, Egyptian museums can work within their 
governing systems and achieve two main action options:

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
19
frontiersin.org
	 1.	 Museums can play an active role in awareness-raising 
campaigns to, on one hand, draw attention to their potential 
pedagogical and educational roles alongside schools in 
facilitating the learning process for SWDs. On the other hand, 
to enhance understanding of the inclusive education barriers 
and support SWDs’ rights.
	 2.	 Pursuing creating partnerships and formalizing coordination 
with the Ministry of Education to identify barriers, formulate 
policies, and set detailed action plans needed for achieving 
inclusive practices in favor of SWDs.
Acknowledging museums as state key instruments and direct 
actors alongside schools in inclusive education are essential to 
accelerate the implementation of inclusive practices.
Museums can work hand-by-hand with schools in promoting 
learning materials and designing regular yearly programs based on the 
school curriculum and state educational plan. It is recommended to 
create a committee or board affiliated with the Cabinets of Ministers 
that encompasses representatives from museums, the Ministry of 
Education, schools, disability organizations, experts, and other 
relevant stakeholders to set regulatory mechanisms enabling museums 
to function to a greater extent in inclusive education as a legitimate 
instrument; revising the school curricula and teaching plans; develop 
educational curricula linked to the museums with more sufficient 
learning materials to make learning more inspiring and engaging for 
SWDs; foster capacity development plans for both museum staff and 
schoolteachers to fulfill curriculum aims.
The author, therefore, argued that the bureaucratic process and 
governmental structure - that were identified as a barrier hindering 
effective communications with schools -could assist in accelerating 
the inclusive practices between the museums’ sector and the 
Ministry of Education. The centralized governing systems of 
museums and schools will allow more flexibility and faster 
responsiveness in formulating a regulatory framework and 
functioning organizational policies that would ultimately result in 
improving inclusive education in Egypt without the need of changing 
the existing organizational structures.
8. Conclusion
From formal, curriculum-based educational visits, and learning 
resources, to informal leisure experiences, Egyptian museums 
contributed to facilitating learning for SWDs, yet on a small scale and 
still lacking capacity and resources, but at the same time, they affirmed 
their commitment to supporting the rights SWDs and assisting in the 
implementation of the inclusive education. Traditionally, the role of 
Egyptian museums in educating children, youth, and even adults is 
well-recognized, but they are yet less recognized as social and 
educational service providers for SWDs. They are not considered key 
actors in inclusive education. Therefore, they have limited resources 
including funding, curriculum requirements, facilities, services, 
specialized training, and an accessible environment among 
other barriers.
The study revealed that, for Egyptian museums to effectively 
implement appropriate pedagogies and successfully advance inclusive 
practices for SWDs, they need to be acknowledged and supported by 
the local government as state instruments and legitimate sources for 
learning SWDs. Thus, institutional arrangements need to 
be  considered between the museums’ sector and the Ministry of 
Education to formulate policies and regulations as well as stimulate 
inclusive practices that will result in implementing inclusive education.
Interestingly, Egyptian museums can act as an effective tool in the 
successful implementation of inclusive education and supporting 
school integration programs. Further, museums, as agents of change, 
have a leading role in advocating the rights of PWDs in all aspects of 
life and expanding acceptance of their educational rights. Hence, the 
Egyptian museums can work within their governing system and 
initiate social and institutional change that supports the rights of 
PWDs in Egyptian society. Moreover, they can contribute to changing 
the mindsets of the state’s leaders towards investing in museums to 
develop quality formal, non-formal, and informal learning experiences 
for SWDs with the appropriate resources and equipment.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in 
the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed 
to the corresponding author/s.
Ethics statement
Ethical review and approval was not required for the study on 
human participants in accordance with the local legislation and 
institutional requirements. Written informed consent for participation 
was not required for this study in accordance with the national 
legislation and the institutional requirements. Written informed 
consent was not obtained from the minor(s)’ legal guardian/next of 
kin for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data 
included in this article. Written informed consent was obtained from 
the individual in Figure 5 for the publication of any identifiable images 
included in this article.
Author contributions
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and 
has approved it for publication.
Funding
This publication was supported by the Open Access Publication 
Fund of the University of Wuerzburg as well as the Museology 
Department of the University of Wuerzburg.
Acknowledgments
This work developed during my Alexander von Humboldt Post-
Doctoral Fellowship at Würzburg University. The author would like to 
sincerely acknowledge all the research participants who gave their 
time so freely to share their experiences in the museum field. The 
author would like to thank the following for their participation and 
support: Elham Salah, the Former Head of the Museums’ Sector; 
Ahmed Rahimah, Assistant to the MoTA’s Minister for Organizational 

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
20
frontiersin.org
Development and Human Resources; Ahmed Hamida, Supervisor of 
the Central Administration of Regional Museums in the Museum’s 
Sector; Tahani Noah, the General Supervisor of the General 
Administration for People with Special Needs (GAPSNs); Ahmed 
Nagi, the Director of GAPSNs; Marwa Abdel Fatah Salam, Head of the 
Educational Departments for Historical Museums in the Museums’ 
Sector; Ahmed Mostafa, Team Member for the Development of 
Visitors Services at Museums and Archeological Sites, Minister Office, 
MoTA; Sayedah Safwot, Head of the Educational Section at the 
Egyptian Museum of Cairo (EMC); Abeer Abdel Galeel, Museum 
Educator, People with Special Needs Unit, EMC; Ahmed Naguib, 
Museum Educator, Educational Section (Visually Impaired School), 
EMC; Adel Mostafa, Museum Educator, Educational Section (Visually 
Impaired School), EMC; Sayed Abu Elfadl, the Deputy Director of the 
NMEC; Azza Razk, the Head of the Educational Department at the 
NEMC; Gehan Nabil, the Head of the Educational Department at the 
GEM; Fatma Soliman, the Head of the Accessibility Team at the Grand 
Egyptian Museum (GEM); Mohamed Abdel Salam, Deputy Director, 
Islamic Art Museum; Rasha Gamal, the Head of the Educational 
Department at the Islamic Art Museum; Roqyia Farouk, the Head of 
the Special Needs Unit at the Islamic Art Museum; Marlin Farag, the 
Head of the Special Needs Unit at the Coptic Museum; Sherif Said, 
Director of Historic House Museums, Museums’ Sector; Mervet Ezzat, 
the Director of the Gayer-Anderson Museum, Museums’ Sector; 
Mohamed Ali, the Head of the Special Needs Unit at the Malawi 
Museum; Fatma Abdelaziz, Deputy Director of Children Center for 
Civilization and Creativity (Child Museum); Nancy Abdel Azizi, 
Museum Educator, the Child Museum.
Conflict of interest
The author declares that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, 
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product 
that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its 
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
References
Abd El-Gawad, H., and Stevenson, A. (2021). Egypt’s dispersed heritage: multi-
directional storytelling through comic art. J. Soc. Archaeol. 21, 121–145. doi: 
10.1177/1469605321992929
Abdel Moniem, A. (2005). The National Museum of Egyptian civilization. Mus. Int. 
Herit. Landsc. Egypt 57, 24–30.
Aboulnaga, M., Puma, P., Eletrby, D., Bayomi, M., and Farid, M. (2022). Sustainability 
assessment of the National Museum of Egyptian civilization (NMEC): environmental, 
social, economic, and cultural analysis. Sustainability 14:13080. doi: 10.3390/
su142013080
Acciona (2020). Grand Egyptian Musuem. Available at: https://www.acciona.com/
projects/grand-egyptian-museum/?_adin=02021864894 (Accessed February 28, 2023).
American Association of Museums. (1984). Museums for a New Century: A Report of 
the Commission on Museums for a New Century. Washington, D.C: American 
Association of Museums.
Antoniou, A.-S., Ntalla, I., and Woollard, V. (2013). “Discussing museum learning 
opportunities for children with disabilities” in Education, Family and Child & Adolescent 
Health. eds. A. Alexander-Stamatios and D. K. Bruce (Athens, Greece: 
Diadrassi Publications)
Baglieri, S., and Shapiro, A. (2017). Disability Studies and the Inclusive Classroom: 
Critical Practices for Embracing Diversity in Education. 2nd. New York: Routledge.
Baligh, R. (2005). “Museum education in Egypt and the world” in Bulletin of the 
Egyptian Museum (Cairo, Egypt: Suprem Council of Antiquities), 23–28.
Barnes, C., Mercer, G., and Shakespeare, T. (1999). Exploring Disability: A Sociological 
Introduction. Malden, Mass: Polity Press.
Bennett, T. (1995). The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics. London; 
New York: Routledge.
Black, G. (2012). Transforming Museums in the Twenty-First Century. USA and 
Canada: Routledge.
Braden, C. (2016). Welcoming All Visitors: Museums, Accessibility, and Visitors with 
Disabilities. USA: University of Michigan.
Brown, K., and Mairesse, F. (2018). The definition of the museum through its social 
role. Curator Mus. J. 61, 525–539. doi: 10.1111/cura.12276
Cali Commitment (2019). Cali Commitment to Equity and Inclusion in Education. 
Outcome Document of the 2019 UNESCO International Forum on Inclusion and Equity 
in Education. Available at: https://www.european-agency.org/news/cali-commitment-
equity-and-inclusion-education#:~:text=15%20October%2C%202019%20
News&text=The%20Cali%20Commitment%20defines%20inclusion,discrimination%20
in%20and%20through%20education. (Accessed February 20, 2023).
Cândido, M., and Pappalardo, G. (2022). Babel Tower. Museum People in Dialogue. 
Paris: International Committee for Museology of the International Council of Museums 
(ICOFOM/ICOM).
Central Agency for Mobilization and Statistics (CAMPAS) (2017). Egypt Census 
2017. First Electronic Census in the History of Egyptian Censuses. Final Results of 
Census 2017 of Population, Housing and Establishments Manager. Available at: 
https://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/Publications.aspx?page_id=5109# 
(Accessed 
October 5, 2022).
Central Agency for Mobilization and Statistics (CAMPAS) (2020). Annual Bulletin 
for Pre-University Education for the Academic 2019/2020. Available at: https://www.
capmas.gov.eg/Pages/IndicatorsPage.aspx?page_id=6142&ind_id=1082 
(Accessed 
October 15, 2022).
Chen, K. T. N. (2013). The disciplinary power of museums. Int J Soc Sci Humanit 3, 
407–410. doi: 10.7763/IJSSH.2013.V3.271
Cochran Hirzy, E., and American Association of Museums. (1998). Excellence and 
Equity: Education and the Public Dimension of Museums: A Report from the American 
Association of Museums. Washington, D.C: American Association of Museums.
Coleman, L.-E. (2018). Understanding and Implementing Inclusion in Museums. 
Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Constitute (2017). Egypt’s Constitution 2014. Constitute Project: Provided by 
International IDEA’s Constitution Net. Available at: https://www.constituteproject.org/
constitution/Egypt_2014.pdf (Accessed October 17, 2022).
Degener, T. (2016). Disability in a human rights context. Laws 5:35. doi: 10.3390/
laws5030035
Delin, A. (2002). “Buried in the footnotes: the absence of disabled people in the 
collective imagery of our past” in Museums, Society, Inequality. ed. R. Sandell (London; 
New York: Routledge), 84–97.
Dierking, L. (1991). Learning theory and learning styles: an overview. J. Mus. Educ. 
16, 4–6. doi: 10.1080/10598650.1991.11510159
Dierking, L. D. (2005). Lessons without limit: how free-choice learning is transforming 
science and technology education. História Ciênc. Saúde-Manguinhos 12, 145–160. doi: 
10.1590/S0104-59702005000400008
Dodd, J. (2015). The socially purposeful museum. Museol. Brun. 4, 28–32.
Egypt Today (2021). Child Center for Civilization & Creativity Celebrates 
International Day of Individuals with Special Needs on December 14. Available at: 
https://www.egypttoday.com/Article/4/110865/Child-Center-for-Civilization-
Creativity-celebrates-International-Day-of-Individuals (Accessed April 14, 2023).
El Sheikh, S. A. H. (2020). Factors affecting pre-visit destination image: application 
on the grand Egyptian museum (GEM). J. Humanit. Appl. Soc. Sci. 2, 215–234. doi: 
10.1108/JHASS-11-2019-0075
Eldamaty, M. (2004). Museum for blind people (in Arabic). Bull. Egypt. Mus. 1, 1–5.
Elhadi, A. (2021). Inclusion of students with disabilities in Egypt: challenges and 
recommendations. J. Educ. E-Learn. Res. 8, 173–178. doi: 10.20448/journal.509.2021.
82.173.178

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
21
frontiersin.org
ElRashidy, O. (2017). School management and educational quality in the context of 
centralized educational governance in Egypt: Examining stakeholder perceptions in private 
language schools, Master’s Thesis, the American University in Cairo, AUC 
Knowledge Fountain.
El-Saddik, W. (1993). Children Museums for Egypt. A Study for Establishing Children’s 
Museums in Egypt and Specific Departments for Museum Education (in Arabic). Dar 
El-Shrouk, Cairo.
Falk, J. H., and Dierking, L. D. (2000). Learning from Museums: Visitor Experiences 
and the Making of Meaning. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Falk, J. H., and Dierking, L. D. (2016). The Museum Experience Revisited. United 
Kindgom: Routledge.
Falk, J. H., Dierking, L. D., and Adams, M. (2006). “Living in a learning society” in A 
Companion to Museum Studies. ed. S. Macdonald (Malden, MA, USA: Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd), 323–339.
Fernandes, M. P., and Norberto Rocha, J. (2022). The experience of adults with visual 
disabilities in two Brazilian science museums: an exploratory and qualitative study. 
Front. Educ. 7:1040944. doi: 10.3389/feduc.2022.1040944
Fleming, D. (2012). “Museums for social justice: managing organisational change” in 
Museums, Equality and Social Justice. eds. R. Sandell and E. Nightingale (Abingdon, 
Oxon; New York: Routledge), 72–83.
Grand Egyptian Museum (2023a). About the Grand Egyptian Musuem. Available at: 
https://grandegyptianmuseum.org/about/ (Accessed February 28, 2023).
Grand Egyptian Museum (2023b). Children’s Museum. Available at: https://dev.gem.
eg/learning/children-museum/ (Accessed November 20, 2022).
Gratton, N. (2020). People with learning disabilities and access to mainstream arts and 
culture: a participatory action research approach. Br. J. Learn. Disabil. 48, 106–114. doi: 
10.1111/bld.12303
Hagrass, H. (2005). “Definitions of disability and disability policy in Egypt” in The 
Social Model of Disability: Europe and the Majority World. eds. C. Barnes and G. Mercer 
(United Kindgom: The Disability Press), 148–162.
Handicap 
International 
Humanity 
and 
Inclusion 
(2022). 
Disability-
Inclusive Education in Egypt. Factsheet – Egypt. Available at: https://www.hi.org/
sn_uploads/document/IE_Egypt_Factsheet_April-2022_Final.pdf 
(Accessed 
February 15, 2023).
Hassanein, E. E. A., Adawi, T. R., and Johnson, E. S. (2021). Barriers to including 
children with disabilities in Egyptian schools. J. Int. Spec. Needs Educ. 24, 25–35. doi: 
10.9782/2331-4001-24.1.25
Hawass, Z. (2005). New era for museums in Egypt. Mus. Int. Herit. Landsc. Egypt 57, 
7–23.
Hawkey, R. (2004). Learning with Digital Technologies in Museums, Science Centres 
and Galleries. London. Available at: https://telearn.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00190496/
document (Accessed April 15, 2023).
Hein, H. S. (2000). The Museum in Transition: A Philosophical Perspective. Washington: 
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Hein, G. E. (2002). Learning in the Museum. USA and Canada: Routledge.
Hein, G. E. (2006). “Museum education” in A companion to Museums Studies. ed. S. 
Macdonald (Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd), 340–352.
Heliopolis Association (2023). The Child Museum. Available at: https://www.
misrelgededa.org/2020/12/03/museum/ (Accessed April 14, 2023).
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (1992). Museums and the Shaping of Knowledge. London; 
New York: Routledge.
Hooper-Greenhill, E. ed. (1999). The Educational Role of the Museum. 2nd London; 
New York: Routledge.
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (2000). Museums and the Interpretation of Visual Culture. 1st 
Edn USA and Canada: Routledge.
Hooper-Greenhill, E. (2007). Museums and Education: Purpose, Pedagogy, 
Performance. London; New York: Routledge.
International Council of Museums (ICOM) (2022). ICOM Approves a New Museum 
Definition. Available at: https://icom.museum/en/news/icom-approves-a-new-museum-
definition/ (Accessed October 24, 2022).
Janes, R. R., and Sandell, R. (2019). “Posterity has arrived” in Museum Activism. eds. 
R. R. Janes and R. Sandell (Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge), 1–22.
Jewitt, C. (2012). Digital technologies in museums: new routes to engagement and 
participation. Design Learn 5:74. doi: 10.2478/dfl-2014-0005
Kanari, C., and Souliotou, A. Z. (2020). Education of children with disabilities in 
NONFORMAL learning environments: a cross-DISCIPLINARY approach of steam 
education in a technological museum in GREECE. EJAE 5, 1–34. doi: 10.46827/ejae.
v5i2.3188
Kim, Y.-W. (2014). Inclusive education in South Korea. Int. J. Incl. Educ. 18, 979–990. 
doi: 10.1080/13603116.2012.693402
Law No. 10 of 2018 (2020). Law on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Arab 
Republic of Egypt, First Edition. Available at: http://ncw.gov.eg/Images/PdfRelease/
Law%20No%2010%20of%202018%20For%20Rights%20o-122020403910677.pdf 
(Accessed November 27, 2022).
Leahy, A., and Ferri, D. (2022). Barriers and facilitators to cultural participation by 
people with disabilities: a narrative literature review. Scand. J. Disabil. Res. 24, 68–81. 
doi: 10.16993/sjdr.863
Lehmannová, M. (2020). International Council of Museums Czech Republic. 224 
Years of Defining the Museum. Available at: https://icom.museum/wp-content/
uploads/2020/12/2020_ICOM-Czech-Republic_224-years-of-defining-the-museum.pdf 
(Accessed November 20, 2022).
Lord, J. E., and Stein, M. A. (2018). Pursuing inclusive higher education in Egypt and 
beyond through the convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. Soc. Incl. 6, 
230–240. doi: 10.17645/si.v6i4.1709
Mahmoud, S. (2012). The Development of Archaeological and Historical Museums in 
Egypt during the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries: Imperialism, Nationalism, 
UNESCO Patronage and Egyptian Museology Today. Available at: http://hdl.handle.
net/2346/45592 (Accessed November 5, 2022).
Mallinson Architects and Engineers (2023). Cairo Children’s Civilisation & Creativity 
Centre. Available at: https://www.mallinsonae.com/cairo-childrens-museum (Accessed 
November 5, 2022).
Mansour, Y. (2005). The grand Museum of Egypt Project: architecture and 
museography1. Pen Press Physick 57, 36–41. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0033.2005.00508.x
Marstine, J. ed. (2006). New Museum Theory and Practice. Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd.
Martins, P. R. (2018). “The representation of disability in DGPC museums collections: 
discourse, identities and sense of belonging” in Representing Disability in Museums. 
Imaginary and Identities. eds. P. R. Martins, A. L. Semedo and C. F. Camacho (Portugal: 
FLUP/CITCEM), 13–34.
Maspero (2021). The General Administration of People with Special Needs Improving 
the Efficiency of Museums to Serve People with Disabilities (in Arabic). Available at: 
https://www.maspero.eg/radio/2023/01/18/320605/%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A5%D8%A
F%D8%A7%D8%B1%D8%A9-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B9%D8%A7%D9%85%D8
%A9-%D9%84%D9%84%D8%AA%D8%B1%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%A9-%D8%A7%
D 9 % 8 4 % D 9 % 8 5 % D 8 % A A % D 8 % A D % D 9 % 8 1 % D 9 % 8 A % D 8 % A 9 -
%D8%AA%D8%B1%D9%81%D8%B9-%D9%83%D9%81%D8%A7%D8%A1% D8%A9-
% D 8 % A 7 % D 9 % 8 4 % D 9 % 8 5 % D 8 % A A % D 8 % A 7 % D 8 % A D % D 9 % 8 1 -
%D9%84%D8%AE%D8%AF%D9%85%D8%A9-%D8%B0%D9%88%D9%8A-%D8%A7
%D9%84%D8%A5%D8%B9%D8%A7%D9%82%D8%A9 (Accessed April 14, 2023).
McCall, V., and Gray, C. (2014). Museums and the ‘new museology’: theory, practice 
and 
organisational 
change. 
Mus. 
Manag. 
Curatorship 
29, 
19–35. 
doi: 
10.1080/09647775.2013.869852
McGhie, H. A. (2020). Museums and Human Rights: Human Rights as a Basis for 
Public 
Service. 
Curating 
Tomorrow, 
UK. 
Available 
at: 
https://
curatingtomorrow236646048.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/museums-and-human-
rights-2020.pdf (Accessed November 22, 2022).
Ministry of Education (2014). Strategic Plan for Pre-University Education 
(2014–2030). Education Egypt National Project. Available at: https://planipolis.iiep.
unesco.org/sites/planipolis/files/ressources/egypt%20efa%20plan.pdf.
Ministry of Education (2021). History of Special Education in Egypt. Available at: 
https://moe.gov.eg/en (Accessed November 15, 2022).
Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform (2015). Sustainable 
Development Strategy. Egypt’s Vision 2030. Cairo.
Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (2019). Inaugurations. Minist. Tour. Antiq. Newsl. 
2, 1–6.
Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (2021). International day of persons with 
disabilities. Minist. Tour. Antiq. Newsl. 16, 1–16.
Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (2022). Inaugurating the service development 
project in gayer Anderson. Minist. Tour. Antiq. Newsl. 17, 1–28.
Moore, P., Paquet, R., and Wittman, A. (2022). Transforming Inclusion in Museums: 
The Power of Collaborative Inquiry. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Morse, N. (2022). The Museum as a Space of Social Care. London: Routledge.
Museum Associations (2020). About Musuems. What Is a Musuem? Available at: 
https://www.museumsassociation.org/about/faqs/#what-is-a-museum 
(Accessed 
October 22, 2022).
National Museum of Egyptian Civilization-NMEC (2021). Special Needs. Available 
at: https://nmec.gov.eg/special-needs/ (Accessed December 14, 2022).
O’Neill, M. (2002). “The good enough visitor” in Museums, Society, Inequality. ed. R. 
Sandell (London; New York: Routledge), 24–40.
O’Neill, M. (2011). Museums and Social Justice: A Theory of Pratice, Unpublished 
Doctoral Thesis, City University London.
Oliver, M. (2013). The social model of disability: thirty years on. Disabil. Soc. 28, 
1024–1026. doi: 10.1080/09687599.2013.818773
PWC (2017). Education Sector in Egypt. Understanding Middle East Education. 
Available at: https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/industries/education/education-country-
profile-egypt.html (Accessed October 11, 2022).

Zakaria
10.3389/feduc.2023.1111695
Frontiers in Education
22
frontiersin.org
Reich, C. (2014). Taking action Toward Inclusion: Organizational Change and the 
Inclusion of People with Disabilities in Museum Learning. Available at: https://core.
ac.uk/reader/151480210 (Accessed April 15, 2023).
Rioux, M., and Carbert, A. (2003). Human rights and disability. J. Dev. Disabil 10, 
1–13.
Rocha, J. N., Fernandes, M. P., and Massarani, L. (2022). “Social models of disability 
and museum research. Inclusion and accessibility in science museums: voices from 
Brazil” in Theorizing Equity in the Museum: Integrating Perspectives from Research and 
Practice Routledge Research in Museum Studies. eds. B. Bevan and B. Ramos (London; 
New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group)
Rocha, J. N., Massarani, L., Abreu, W. V. D., Inacio, L. G. B., and Molenzani, A. O. 
(2020). Investigating accessibility in Latin American science museums and centers. An. 
Acad. Bras. Ciênc. 92:e20191156. doi: 10.1590/0001-3765202020191156
Said Louay, M. (2002). Ahmed Basha Kamal: Pioneer of the Archaeological 
Enlightenment (in Arabic). Cairo: Supreme Council of antiquities.
Sandahl, J. (2019). The museum definition as the backbone of ICOM. Mus. Int. 71, 
vi–9. doi: 10.1080/13500775.2019.1638019
Sandell, R. (1998). Museums as agents of social inclusion. Mus. Manag. Curatorship 
17, 401–418. doi: 10.1080/09647779800401704
Sandell, R. ed. (2002). Museums, Society, Inequality. London; New York: Routledge.
Sandell, R. (2003). Social inclusion, the museum and the dynamics of Sectoral change. 
Mus. Soc. 1, 45–62.
Sandell, R. (2017). Museums, Moralities and Human Rights. London; New York: 
Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.
Sandell, R., and Dodd, J. (2010). “Activist practice” in Re-presenting Disability. Activism 
and Agency in the Museum. eds. R. Sandell, J. Dodd and R. Garland-Thomson (London 
and Newyork: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group), 3–22.
Sandell, R., Dodd, J., and Garland-Thomson, R. eds. (2010). Re-presenting Disability: 
Activism and Agency in the Museum. London; New York: Routledge.
Sandell, R., and Nightingale, E. eds. (2012). Museums, Equality, and Social Justice. 
Abingdon, Oxon; New York: Routledge.
Sang, K., Calvard, T., and Remnant, J. (2022). Disability and academic careers: 
using the social relational model to reveal the role of human resource management 
practices in creating disability. Work Employ. Soc. 36, 722–740. doi: 
10.1177/0950017021993737
Schuelka, M., and Johnstone, C. J. (2012). Global trends in meeting the educational 
rights of children with disabilities: from international institutions to local responses. 
Reconsidering Dev. 2, 1–14.
Shakespeare, T. (2006). Disability Rights and Wrongs. United Kingdom: Routledge.
Shakespeare, T. (2014). Disability Rights and Wrongs Revisited. 2nd. London; 
New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Shakespeare, T., and Watson, N. (Eds.) (2001). The Social Model of Disability: An 
Outdated Ideology, vol. 2, 9–28.
Shakespeare, T., and Watson, N. (2002). The social model of disability: an outdated 
ideology? Res. Soc. Sci. Disabil. 2, 9–28. doi: 10.1016/S1479-3547(01)80018-X
Silverman, L. H. (2010). The Social Work of Museums. London; New York: Routledge.
Smith, B., and Bundon, A. (2018). “Disability models: explaining and understanding 
disability sport in different ways” in Palgrave Handbook of Paralympic Studies eds. I. 
Brittain and A. Beacom (London, United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan), 15–34.
Srivastava, M., de Boer, A., and Pijl, S. J. (2015). Inclusive education in developing 
countries: a closer look at its implementation in the last 10 years. Educ. Rev. 67, 179–195. 
doi: 10.1080/00131911.2013.847061
State Information Service (2019). The National Council for Persons with Disabilities. 
Available at: https://www.sis.gov.eg/Story/142861/The-National-Council-for-Persons-
with--Disabilities?lang=en-us (Accessed February 23, 2023).
State Tactile Museo Omero (2023). The Museo Omero Exports Accessibility to 
Alexandria in Egypt. Available at: https://www.museoomero.it/en/updates/
the-museo-omero-exports-accessibility-to-alexandria-in-egypt/ (Accessed February 
26, 2023).
Stone, E. (1999). Disability and development in the majority world. E Stone Ed Disabil. 
Dev. Learn. Action Res. Disabil. Major. World, 1–18.
Talboys, G. K. (2005). Museum Educator’s Handbook. Aldershot, Hants, England; 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate Pub. Co.
The Egyptian Museum (2009). Egyptian museum newsletter. Supreme Counc. Antiq. 
Egypt 6, 1–7.
The Egyptian Museum (2022). Children’s Museum. Available at: https://
egyptianmuseumcairo.eg/emc/childrens-museum/ (Accessed November 20, 2022).
Thomas, C. (2004). Rescuing a social relational understanding of disability. Scand. J. 
Disabil. Res. 6, 22–36. doi: 10.1080/15017410409512637
Thomas, C. (2007). Sociologies of Disability and Illness. London: Palgrave.
Tlili, A. (2008). Behind the policy mantra of the inclusive museum: receptions of 
social exclusion and inclusion in museums and science Centres. Cult. Sociol. 2, 123–147. 
doi: 10.1177/1749975507086277
UNESCO (1994). The Salamanca Statement and Framework for Action on Special 
Needs Education. Paris, France: UNESCO.
UNESCO (2016). Recommendation Concerning the Protection and Promotion of 
Museums and Collections, Their Diversity and Their Role in Society Adopted by the 
General Conference at its 38th Session, Paris, 17 November 2015. Available at: https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000246331 (Accessed February 22, 2023).
UNESCO (2020). Global education monitoring report, 2020: Inclusion and education: 
all means all. France: UNESCO.
United Nations (2006). Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
Available at: http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/rights/convtexte.htm (Accessed 
November 22, 2022).
United Nations OHCHR (n.d.). Questionnaire on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities to Social Protection. Egypt, pp. 1–9. Available at: http://www.ohchr.org/
Documents/Issues/Disability/SocialProtection/States/MS_Egypt_ENG.docx (Accessed 
November 11, 2022).
Velázquez Marroni, C. (2017). Beyond the “object-oriented vs. visitor/idea-oriented 
museum” divide: the value of objects for museum experiences. Museol. Brun, 12–20. doi: 
10.5817/MuB2017-1-2
Walters, D. (2009). Approaches in museums towards disability in the United Kingdom 
and 
the 
United 
States. 
Mus. 
Manag. 
Curatorship 
24, 
29–46. 
doi: 
10.1080/09647770902731759
Wapling, L. (2016). Inclusive Education and Children with Disabilities: Quality 
Education for All in Low and Middle Income Countries. Available at: https://www.cbm.
org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/Quality_Education_for_All_LMIC_Evidence_
Review_CBM_2016_Full_Report.pdf (Accessed February 20, 2023).
Weil, S. (1999). From being about something to being for somebody: the ongoing 
transformation of the American museum. Daedalus Am. Mus. 128, 229–258.
Weil, S. (2002). Making Museums Matter. Washington, DC: Smithsonian 
Institution Press.
Wendy, D. (2008). The poetics of Egyptian museum practice. Br. Mus. Stud. Anc. Egypt 
Sudan 10, 1–37.
World Health Organization (WHO) (2011). World Report on Disability. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization.
World Health Organization and World Bank (2011). World Report on Disability 
2011. Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/44575 (Accessed March 04, 
2023).
Zakaria, N. N. (2019). Egypt’s cultural heritage in conflict situations: examination of 
past and present impact. Pol. Archaeol. Mediterr. 28, 521–550. doi: 10.31338/
uw.2083-537X.pam28.2.29
Zakaria, N. N. (2020). Barriers to social inclusion with the Egyptian museums. New 
Approach Towards Disability Curator Mus. J. 63, 115–130. doi: 10.1111/cura.12353

