RECONCEPTUALIZING INCLUSION IN MUSEUM SPACES: A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY FRAMEWORK
M. Mastrogiuseppe^ L. Soares Guedes^, S. Span^, P. Clementi, M. Landoni^
^University of Trieste (ITALY)
^Università della Svizzera italiana, Lugano (SWiTZERLAND)
^Cooperativa Sociale Trieste Integrazione a m. Anffas Onius (ITALY)
Abstract
This paper descrìbes an exploration into technology design to make cultural spaces accessible to people
with mild or moderate intellectual disabilities (IDs). We start by considering thè roie technology can play
in promoting thè engagement and enjoyment of cultural heritage and move on to explore how to design
for rewardlng user experiences in that context. For that purpose, we bave recruited a multidisciplinary
team of experts, including researchers in Users Experience (UX) research, psychology, and education,
to Work together with practitioners skilied in thè care of people with IDs. Cruciai members of our research
team are a small group of people with IDs who bave been working with experts in education over thè
years and bave an established emotìonal relationship with them. Together, we set out to learn from each
other while exploring thè design space for producing technicai Solutions to enhance accessibility,
usabiiity, and thè overall quality of thè interaction with content available to museum visitors. We describe
thè lesson learned in terms of theframework we devised, reflecton its implications and suggest possible
steps towards designing toois to enhance accessibility and engagement.
Keywords: Accessibility, Intellectual Disabilities. Experts, Co-design, Inclusion, Framework.
1
 INTRODUCTION
Makìng culture accessible to people with Intellectual Disabilities (IDs) represents an ethical imperative
and a technicai challenge that may open interesting implications for research and educational practice
[1.2].
In thè last few years, a growing interest in understanding how to promote access to knowledge for people
with IDs has been fueied by increased legislative priorities and società! expectations for individuala in
this population. Life environments and their organization bave been increasingly considered as having
a substantial impact in favoring or hindering thè functioning of people, affecting thè ability of an individuai
to deal independently with thè circumstances of everyday lite (ICF, [3]).
Previous studies bave mainly focused on investigating what factors shouid be considered in building
accessible environments for people with motor and sensory impairments [4, 5, 6]. However, thè current
focus on thè participation for all highiights thè importance of reconceptualizing inclusion in museum
spaces, considering thè variability of potential visitors and extending thè concept of accessibility to all
its dimensiona (communicative, cognitive, cultural, social, physical, etc. [7]). In this direction, thè use of
information and communication technologies (ICTs) may help remove cognitive and communicative
barriera by encouraging flexibility in identifying multiple ways of understanding, processing, and
elaborating content.
ICTs are certainly a valuable support for increasing participation of people with IDs in cultural and social
life, but simply stating that technologies are useful poses thè risk of increasing attention to products
rather than their applicability, usabiiity, and effectiveness in meeting people's needs [8]. There is a need
to investigate thè processes behind thè introduction and use of ICTs within museum spaces. It is
imperative when we talk about people with disabilities because a thorough understanding of thè specific
ways in which leaming, communication, and engagement occur is necessary.
The Convention on thè Rights of People with Disabilities [9] highiights thè application of two principles
to avoid any form of discriminatlon (art. 2). These principles are: "Reasonable accommodatlon”, i.e.,
necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments to ensure to persone with disabilities thè
enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
"Universal design", i.e., thè design of products, environments, programs, and Services to be usable by
all people, to thè greatest extent possible, without thè need for adaptation or specialized design,
including thè assistive devices for particular groups of pereons with disabilities where this is needed.
ISBN: 978-84-09-34549-6
Proceedings of ICERI2021 Conference
8th-9ih November 2021
7225

If we considerthe population with intellectual disabilities, a current interpretation according to thè bio-
psycho-social perspective as opposed to an outdated conception of "meritai retardation", conceives thè
importance of thè interaction between thè person and thè context in which they are placed in determining
their disability. The large varìability characterizing people with IDs receivìng thè same diagnosis is not
oniy thè result of quantitative and qualitative difTerences in thè cognitive (i.e. language, memory,
attention, visual-perceptual, and visuomotor skills) and personality characteristics [10] but is also
determined by thè interaction between these factors and thè context. In fact, different physical, social,
communication contexts with whom thè person interacts can lead to different manifestations and
characteristics related to thè same disability. Based on thè presence of barriers or facilitators, different
environments may be more or less disabling or enabling to thè same person.
In order to avoìd barriers and promote facilitators to communication and learning, thè Convention on thè
Rights of People with Disabilities [9] highiights that accessible ICTs shouid be included when designing
"reasonable accommodations" according to thè design for ali principles. Communication includes
"languages, display of text, Braille, tactile communication, large print, accessible multimedia as well as
written, audio, plain-language, human-reader and augmentative and alternative modes, means and
formate of communication, including accessible Information and communication technology" (art. 2).
ICTs could account for different profiles within thè large population of intellectual disabilities by
considering other ways of representing, expressing knowledge/needs/ideas, and a variety of ways to
engagé with culture.
An investigation of thè process behind thè introduction and use of ICTs within cultural spaces needs to
be taken in order to promote thè application of thè two principles outlined above. The aim of thè present
paper is twofold. The first aim is to understand thè role of new technologies in promoting thè fruition of
cultural heritage, including thè perspective and needs of people with Intellectual Disabilities. For that
purpose, we recruited a multidiscipiinary team of experts, including researchers in Users Experience
(UX) research, psychology, and education, museum didactic, to work together with practìtioners skilied
in thè care of people with IDs. The experts were asked to investigate thè processes - 
i.e., why, what,
how-behind thè introduction and use of ICTs within cultural spaces. The second aim is to model a co-
design procedure to simplify museum textual resources with thè active contribution of aduits with a mild-
moderate intellectual disability. This initial theorization will outline methodologies, procedures, and
standards to be applied in thè co-design of innovative technological Solutions, subject to a subsequent
work by thè authors.
2
 METHODOLOGY
There is thè need to investigate thè processes - 
i.e. why, what, how - behind thè introduction and use
of ICTs within museum spaces.
To comprehensively explore these processes, we used a multidiscipiinary research framework involving
a group of experts from different backgrounds (i.e., one psychologist, one pedagogist, two computer
scientists and UX researchers, two social workers, and one museum curator).
In a first research phase, thè multidiscipiinary team participated in ten meetings (10 hours duration) to
build a discussion on issues related to thè foilowing topic: “Which is thè role of new technologies in
promoting thè fruition of cultural heritage including thè perspective and needs of people with Intellectual
Disabilities?”. After these joint meetings, a moment of individuai reflection was promoted so that each
expert could respond to thè foilowing research questione:
● 
The first question was related to thè comprehension of why ICTs may be useful and functional for
people with ID within museum spaces. In other words, which are thè motivations behind thè
introduction of ICTs within museums for thè scope of enhancing cognitive and communication
accessibility?
● 
The second question was related to understanding what ICT-based products could be
successfully adapted to current museum themes, spaces, and exhibits to facilitate communication
and learning for people with IDs.
● 
The third question was related to thè comprehension of how to realize ICTs-based products that
are able to meet thè different needs of people with IDs. For example: How to run a co-design
process with people with IDs accounting for and respecting diverse abiiities? How to avoid poor
usability, cognitive overload, and techno-frustration?
7226

This research phase look place remotely. Each expert individually created their own visual board with
thè concept Canvas, ìncluding their point of view on thè questions outlined above.
In a second research phase, thè goal was to explore thè third question further - howto run and validate
co-design procedures with people with IDs accounting for and respecting diverse abilities? We directiy
involved experts in psychology, special pedagogy, and educational Sciences in thè observation and
analysis of co-design sessions aimed at simplifying museum textual resources with thè active
contribution of aduits with a mild-moderate intellectual disability. The co-design sessions were led by a
social worker expert in easy-to-read procedures {www.llfe-long-learnìng.eu). The observation was
conducted at thè Anffas Association ("Cooperativa Sociale Trieste Integrazione a m. Anffas Onius"),
which has extensive and Consolidated experience in easy-to-read methodologies. Cruciai members of
our research team were a small group of people with IDs who have been working with experts in
education over thè years and have an established emotional relationshìp with them. Together, we set
out to learn from each other whìle explorìng thè design space for producing technical Solutions to
enhance accessibility, usability, and thè overali quality of thè interaction with content avaìiable to
museum visitors. The co-design sessions were video-recorded and were subsequently analyzed by thè
experts in psychology, special pedagogy, and educational Sciences. The analysis allowed us to outline
thè first modeling of a social-worker-Ied co-design intervention based on scaffolding methodologies to
promote thè full participation of people with IDs during thè entìre process.
3
 RESULTS
Resuits of thè two research phases are reported separately.
3.1 Why, what, and how?
Each expert individually created their own visual board with thè concept Canvas, including their point of
view on thè questions outlined above. The individuai answers were then collected by thè authors of this
contribution and merged in a visual board. Different colors represent thè contribution of experts in
various disciplinary fieids: in blue computer scientists and UX researchers, in green social workers, in
orango pedagogues and psychologists, in bright pink museum curatore. While we present each
contribution separately in this research stage, in future studies, our goal wìll be to involve both thè users
with IDs and thè stakeholders in some brainstorming sessions to create an affinity diagram on thè
relevant themes (clustere) and together extract related user requirements to guide thè design of new
toois to increase accessibility and engagement in museum visitors.
3.1.1 Why?
Inclusion of
thè greatest
number of
visitors
To
Creation of
flexible
pathways
Increase
legibility,
readability 
perception
To
enhance
extended
content
Aiternative
communication
Immediate,
easy to use,
eye-
catching
To improve
content
fruìtion and
elaboration
Personalizati
on of
contents
Interactive To'   ef^iember 
To explain
content after
thè visir
content
scenario
To supporr
different
reading
needs
Expand thè
experience
Alternative 
Promote thè
right to
learn more 
Participation
for all
ways to
To
To engagé
readers
understand
context
Involve visual,
auditory,
motor,
cognitive
channels
To get
familiarìzed
with thè
content before 
accessibility
thè visit
To ensure
ICT allows
to increase
knowledge
Adapt to
different
cognitive
styles and
preferences
Responsive to
thè needs of
people with
disabilities
Figure 1. Why shouid we introduce and use ICTs within museum spaces?
7227

The main motìvations behind thè introduction of technology are that ìt couid:
Increase legibilìty and readability: using ICTs to read content presented in different font sizes,
colors, languages, and text lengths;
Encourage interaction: ICTs can avoid users' abstractions with hands-on prototypes and
multisensory experiences;
Extend, explain and understand content: technology can help people with ID to understand thè
museum content. explain them in various ways, and extend what is available in an exhibition;
Engagé and get familiarized with thè content: making users more engaged and prepared for thè
exhibition:
Help recalling thè content: using ICTs to access and retain thè museum visit;
Support different forms of reading and ensure accessibility: considerìng different abilities and
forms of reading can ensure that people with ID choose what fits thè most with their preferences
and, consequently, ensure accessibility;
Improve fruition: ICT’s couid be used to strengthen thè fruition of tangible and intangible heritage
in museum contexts;
Promote thè right to participation for all;
Provide flexibiiity and adapt to different cognitive styles and preferences.
3.1.2 What?
Easily
adapted to
thè needs
ofusers
In-depth
study of
specifìc
themes
Pictures
and
videos
Reach
different
types of
disabilities
Dedicated
screen
readers
Legibility
enhancing
layout and text
presentations
Intuitive
and easy
to use
Learning
paths of re-
elaboration
(POST)
Ad-hoc
text to
speech
Making &
Hands-on
AAC
QR code
Products that
use known
accessibility
criteria
Accessible
before thè
museum
visit
Tools to
support
reading
Multisensory
experiences
Customization
Accessible
and usable
websites
Highiight
text and
change
audio pace
Use easy-
to-read
language,
AAC
Learning
paths
during visit
Age, cognitive,
language
abilities. and
preferences
Augmented
reality
Figure 2. What couid be successfully adapted to current museum spaces?
Fig. 2 displays thè second question: what ICT-based products couid be successfully adapted to current
museum themes, spaces, and exhibits to facilitate communication and learning for people with IDs? Our
resuits showed that technology couid help in many ways by:
● Enhancing legibility by providing many alternative layout and text presentations: using ICTs, we
can display and evaluate different designs and ways to present content;
● 
Giving alternatives to reading aa in thè Text-to-speech approach where people can listen to
content benign read by different voices and at different paces;
● 
Supporting active reading, with tools to highiight text during reading as to increase thè focus and
visual involvement with text;
● Providing assistive technology, such as screen readers, to read thè entire screen content;
7220

● 
Extending thè reai worid wìth Augmented Reality, such as 3D objects, textual and audio feedback;
● 
Adding or replacing textual elements to make people with ID and other disabilities able to
understand thè content, as with Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC);
● 
Reinventing and expanding objects and artworks to use several senses at thè sartie time (see,
feel, bear, smeli, taste) to produce Multisensory experiences;
● 
Accessing non-textual material extra photos and videos with ICT devices;
● 
Using technology hands-on, thus promotìng an active learning paradigm for creating contenti
♦ Customizing content based on age, cognitive and language abilities, and preferences.
3.1.3 How?
Finally, we report thè results related to thè third point on how to realize ICTs-based products that are
able to meet thè different needs of people with IDs.
This research question aims to encourage a twofold analysis: (i) how to run co-design with people with
IDs accounting for and respecting diverse abilities? (ii) how to avoid poor usability, cognitive overload,
and techno-frustration?
Same process
ofseleaionas
Empowering
Importance of
recognizing
that everyone
can contribute
Listening io
thè point of
view of people
with IDs
Scaffolding
methodologies
and
for
engaging
simplification
Respecting
users'
different
abilities
Evaluation of
thè reai needs
and interests
of people with
disabilities
Creation of a
positive working
climate in co-
design sessions
AR - difficult
to co-design
Multidisciplinary
framevvork
Next stepfrom
whataiready
being done by
thè social
worker
Invotvemem of
caregivers who
knows people
with IDs (social
workers)
Coliaboratlon with
people with
disabilities to test
theaccessibilityof
museum exhibits
Direct and
continuous
design with
people with
disabilities
Methodologies
and
International
standards
Figure 3. How to co-design with people with IDs accounting for and respecting diverse abilities?
Regarding thè fìrst question, thè main findings available in Fig. 3 
are that when co-designing with people
with IDs we shouid aim at:
● 
Empowering and engaging: making users engaged and empowered by listening and always
considering their voice;
● 
Respecting users' different abilities; by respecting thè users' preferences and skills, thè co-design
sessions can be faster and more effective;
● Being aware of complexity: to co-design new or unknown technologies, such as Augmented
Reality, can be difficult;
● 
Replicating successful processesi applying text simplification
 techniques can be similar to
adapting thè user interface (Ul);
● 
Setting up a Multidisciplinary framework: evidence-based educational (EBE) practices couid be
translated into innovative methodologies, protocois, procedures for co-design;
● Designing scaffolding methodologies with experts: guidance from practitioners on how to engagé
people with special needs.
7229

Venfy thc pre-
requisices
necessary for thè
Creation of
multiple levels
of coment
simplification
With thè
accessibillty of
computer media
and applying
guidelines
Accessible
settings
To provide
alternatives
Different
fontsizes
reai
urtdcrstanding of
thè topics
 Intuitive
Text 
and easy to
simplification
levels
use
interface
Icons
selected by
co-designers
Sicp by step
VERIPICATION of
accessibillty
with People with
disabilities
Verify coment
comprehensibili
ty with work
sessions with
people with IDs
Validating thè
Impact of
technological
Products
Respect thè
learning
curve and
preferences
With co-
design
sessions
indrvidual and
group work.
brainstorming,
questionnaires
and interviews,
Implementation
of simplified
languages in
Identification
of alternative
paths
ICTs
etc.
Figure 4. How to avoid poor usability, cognitive overload, and techno-frustration?
Conceming thè second question (how to avoid poor usability, cognitive overload, and techno-
frustration), thè main results available in Fig.  4 suggest that we shouid be looking at:
Providing alternatives: having choices or settings that thè participants can choose from;
Selecting carefully icons and symbois: thè semiotic shouid make sense for thè users;
Having co-design sessions: avoìding designing forthem but instead with them;
Enabling accessible settings: Choices ranging from color scheme to audio pace and font size;
Offerìng easy-to-read content: available in different simplification levels;
Respecting thè learning curve and preferences: each participant will take a different time to
understand and feel comfortable with thè use of ICTs;
Designing intuitive and easy-to-use interface: too many commands to execute a simple task can
easily frustrate thè participants;
Requiring validation: Rigorous methodologies for validating thè involvement and impact of
technological products.
Prelìminary ideas on running co-design with people with IDs
In thè second research phase, thè experts in psychology, special pedagogy, and educational Sciences
observed and analyzed thè procedure used by a social worker while running co-design sessions aìmed
at creating easy-to-read museum written contente with thè active contribution of adults with a mild-
moderate intellectual disability. The analysis allowed to outline an initial modeling of a social-worker-Ied
co-design intervention based on scaffoiding methodologies, aimed at promoting thè full participation of
people with IDs during thè entire process. Mere we describe it in its fundamental steps. Scaffoiding is
an evidence-based education (EBE) practice with a long history of application and success in facilitating
learning for people with learning disabilities. It typically involves helpful, stmctured interaction between
an adult and a child, with thè aim of helping thè child achieve a specific goal. Based on Wood [11] thè
experts identifìed some steps of scaffolded instructions that thè caregiver used as generai guidelines
while running thè co-design.
Pre-engagement with thè participant: caregiver considers thè participant's cognitive and affective
needs to personalize task-related instructions (e.g.. they determine how to simplify thè language
with which they provide instructions)
Provide tailored assistance: The caregiver uses some strategies and adjusts them to meet thè
participant's needs. This means that thè caregiver is particularly receptìve to thè participant's
thoughts/needs and attuned to their feelings, grasping thè expressed ideas and emotions.
Moreover, thè caregiver couid give active support to thè participant by cueing or prompting,
questioning, modeling, telling, or discussing in order to elicit thè expression of new
ideas/needs/feelings.
3.2
1
2
7230

3 Maintain pursuit of thè goal: The caregiver adopts strategies to help participants remain focused
on their goals. The caregiver couid ask few and frequent questiona, request clarification as well
as offer praise and encouragement. By using these strategies, thè caregiver aims to support
metacognitive processes and maintain an actìve levei of engagement.
4 Give feedback: To help participants learn to monitor their own progress, thè caregiver couid
summarize current progress and explìcitly note behaviors that contributed to each participants
success.
5
 
Control for frustration and risic. The caregiver couid create an environment where participants feel
free to take risks with learning by encouraging them to try altematives.
These strategies were applied by involving one participant at a time or an entire group of participants
with IDs through brainstorming activities. The advantage of group activities is that they support
cooperative structured and/or incidental learning processes, especially when thè affective-relational
dimension is placed at thè foundation of thè group work. The theorization of a social-worker-Ied co-
design intervention based on scaffolding methodologies will serve to outline methods, procedures, and
standards to be applied in thè co-design of innovative technological Solutions, thè subject of a
subsequent contribution by thè authors of thè present paper.
4
 CONCLUSIONS
Museums are increasingly considered places of great interest to encourage thè inclusion of visitors who
are stili excluded from regolar attendance due to barriers that limit their abìlity to use and access thè
content. This is thè case, for example, of people with intellectual disabilitles, but also of visitors who tend
to be excluded due to different social, cultural, linguistic, and age variables [12].
The advent of new technologies for thè promotion and enhancement of cultural heritage requires thè
activation of a multidisciplinary debate that shouid involve experts from different backgrounds in
understanding which might be thè role of new technologies in removing these barriers. ICTs couid be of
great importance in promoting thè fruition of cultural heritage for people with special educational needs
[13, 14, 15,16]. The scientific community must address how to design and use technologically innovative
Solutions that meet thè needs of different visitors, allowing thè participation ofall in cultural and social life.
The first objective of this paper was to outline thè perspectives that emerged from a multidisciplinary
debate involving a group of experts from different backgrounds (i.e., psychologìsts, pedagogista,
computer scientists, UX designers, social workers, museum curatore) in investigating thè processes -
i.e., why, what, how - 
behind thè introduction and use of ICTs within museum spaces.
Answers given to thè first two questiona ~ why ICTs may be useful and functional for people with IDs
within museum spaces? and what ICT-based produets couid be successfully adapted to current
museum themes, spaces, and exhibits to facilitate communication and learning for people with IDs? -
showed that reasonable accommodations are needed, especially concerning adapting thè ways in which
cultural Information is transmitted. With particular importance are technological Solutions geared to
improve thè legibility and comprehensibility of textual Information. These vary from providing
personalized layouts (enabling users to adjust font and size) to thè availability of screen readers, reading
aloud just when and what thè visitor needs, and thè representation of textual content in alternative forms
to appeal to different sensory channels. Augmented alternative communication beìng a starting point to
explore thè potential of augmented reality, where instead of non-legible text, we couid present visitors
with 3D objects, and audio feedback.
Resuits from thè third question - how to run and validate co-design procedure with people with IDs
accounting for and respecting diverse abilities?  - showed that there is a need to translate toois and
methodologies currently in use by practitioners in their daily activities with people with disabilitles into
standards that couid be applied by researchers, computer scientists, and ICTs experts, in running
participatory design activities in a number of contexts and with different communities. Co-design has
proved successful in including users' perspectives in thè early production of toois for them to use. In
particular, there is a rich literature [e.g. 17] reporting on thè positive impact of engaging children in co-
design activities where they are thè protagonists while playing different roles from informant to
investigator and evaluator. Nere, we emphasize thè importance of an experienced educator for
facilitating communication among researchers and co-designers, defining activities to offer thè right levei
of engagement but, more importantly, helping co-designers find and play thè most suitable role to
empower and involve them actively as thè protagonists of thè process.
7231

In a second research phase, thè goal was to further explore thè third question in order to outline thè
initial modeling of a social-worker-Ied co-design intervention based on scaffolding methodologies.
Scaffolding methodologies bave long been applied to enhance thè participation and engagement of
people with learning difficulties. Nere, we want to highiight thè fact that some evidence-based education
(EBE) practices, like scaffolding methodologies. couid be effectively used to support thè co-design of
technological Solutions. These resuits underiine thè importance of emphasizing a muitidisciplinary
dialogue that can activate cross-disciplinary encroachments to outline methodologies, programs,
procedures, and International standards to foster inclusive access to cultural heritage.
REFERENCES
Hayhoe, S., inclusive capitai, human value and cultural access: a case study of disability access at
Yosemite National Park. In B. Hadley, & D. McDonald (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of disability
arts, culture, and media (pp. 251-262). Taylor & Francis Group, 2018.
Austin, S., Duncan, K., Goggin, G., MacDowall, L., Pardo, V., Paterson, E., et al., The last
avantgarde? In B. Hadley, & D. McDonald (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of disability aris, culture,
and media (pp. 251-262). Taylor & Francis Group, 2018.
World Health Organization, International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health: ICF.
Geneva: WHO, 
2001.
Argyropoulos, V. S., & Kanari, C., Re-imagining thè museum through “touch”: Reflections of
individuala with visual disability on their experience of museum-visiting in Greece, ALTER,
European Journal of Disability Research, 9(2), 130-143,2015.
Castrodale, M., & Crooks, V. A., The production of disability research in human geography: An
introspective examination. Disability and Society, 25(1), 89-102,2010.
Marie Lid, I., & Solvang, P., (Dis)ability and thè experience of accessibility in thè urban environment.
ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research, 10(2), 181-194,2016.
Aquario, D., Pais, I., & Ghedin, E. (2017). Accessibilità alla conoscenza e Unìversal Design. Uno
studio esplorativo con docenti e studenti universitari. Italian Journal of Special Education for
Inclusion, 5(2), 93-105
Bortolotti, E., & Mastrogiuseppe, M. (2019). Accessibility to cultural heritage sites for intellectual
disability: Methodologies, technologies and adaptive processes (Accessibilità ai siti culturali per la
disabilità intellettiva: Metodologie, tecnologie  e processi di adattamento). Nuova Secondaria, 4
(1828^582).
CounciI of Europe Secretariat, United Nations drait "International Convention on thè Rights of
Persona with Disabilities": Drafting proposais and commenta. 2006, Retrieved May 2007, from
http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/rights/ahc8docs/ahc8eucouncil1.doc
[10] American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and statistica! manual ofmental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author, 2013.
[11] Wood, D., How children think and leam. Oxford, England: Basii Blackwell, 1978.
[12] Sandell, R., Dodd, J., & Garland-Thomson, R., Re-presenting disability: Activism andagencyin thè
museum, London: Routledge, 2010.
[13] Owuor J., Larkan F., Kayabu B., et al., Does assistive technology contribute to social inclusion for
people with intellectual disability? A systematic review protocol, BMJ Open, 8:e017533, 2018.
[14] Boot, F., Owuor, J., Dinsmore, J. and MacLachlan, M., Access to assistive technology for people
with intellectual disabilities: a systematic review to identify barriers and facilitators, Journal of
Intellectual Disability Research, 62(10), pp.900-921,2018.
[15] Baroni F., Lazzari M., Tecnologie informatiche e diritti umani per un nuovo approccio all'accessibiità,
Italian Journal of Disability Studies, vol.1, n.1, pp.79-92, 2013.
[16] Lazzari, M, Informatica umanistica. Seconda edizione, McGraw-Hill, 2014, pp. 326. ISBN:
9788838668555 ISBN: 9788838691300, 2014.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
7232

[17] Iversen, O. S., Smith, R.C., & Dindler, C., Child as Protagonist: Expanding thè Role of Children in
Participatory Design in Proceedings ofthe 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Chiidren
(!DC '17), Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27-37, 2017.
7233

