See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/371562446
Multisensory Diorama: Enhancing Accessibility and Engagement in Museums
Conference Paper · August 2023
CITATION
1
READS
242
4 authors, including:
Leandro Guedes
University of Lugano
37 PUBLICATIONS   134 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Irene Zanardi
University of Lugano
11 PUBLICATIONS   19 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Monica Angela Landoni
University of Lugano
20 PUBLICATIONS   64 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Leandro Guedes on 14 June 2023.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Multisensory Diorama: Enhancing Accessibility
and Engagement in Museums
Leandro S. Guedes1, Irene Zanardi1, Stefania Span2, and Monica Landoni1
1 Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Switzerland
(leandro.soares.guedes, irene.zanardi, monica.landoni)@usi.ch
www.luxia.inf.usi.ch
2 Cooperativa Sociale Trieste Integrazione a m. Anffas Onlus, Italy
Abstract. This paper describes the design and evaluation of a Mul-
tisensory Diorama (MSD) intended as a tool to provide an alternative
learning environment for people with intellectual disabilities (ID) in mu-
seums. The MSD is designed to be interactive, engaging, and accessible
to accommodate the specificities of participants with ID, and to help con-
textualize and consolidate previous knowledge. The MSD is a portable
box with RFID readers, LEDs, a fan, a photoresistor, a button, an Ar-
duino Uno, an MP3 shield, a speaker, and an external battery. The MSD
offers two different ways of engagement and interaction via exploration
and gamification: visitors can explore the augmented landscape and play
a matching game that reinforces their knowledge of the food chain in
the forest. In a formative evaluation approach focusing on the accessi-
bility and engagement with the MSD, a study was conducted with 12
adults with ID, who provided valuable feedback to improve the design
and make necessary adjustments for future implementations. The MSD
proved to be a successful tool for engaging visitors and reinforcing their
understanding of the food chain in an interactive and accessible way.
Keywords: Multisensory Experiences · Diorama · Accessibility · People
with Intellectual Disabilities · Museum · Inclusion
1
Introduction
Museums are spaces of knowledge and cultural heritage, offering a range of expe-
riences that aim to inform, educate, and entertain visitors. Unfortunately, many
people face barriers when accessing and enjoying museums, including people with
intellectual disabilities (ID). The barriers include the complexity of information
and lack of inclusive interpretation. To address them, there has been growing in-
terest in developing inclusive practices and accessible environments in museums.
In particular, there has been a focus on enhancing the multisensory experience
of museums by engaging multiple senses and modes of communication [11].
Multisensory experiences can facilitate learning and engagement and can
enhance the accessibility of museums for people with ID. One approach to cre-
ating multisensory museum experiences is through dioramas, which are three-
dimensional models or displays showing a scene or an event. Dioramas, which

2
L. S. Guedes et al.
can provide a rich and immersive experience, allow visitors to explore different
perspectives, time periods, and cultural contexts while promoting and enhancing
learning and critical thinking.
This paper explores the potential of multisensory experience dioramas to en-
hance accessibility and engagement in museums for individuals with intellectual
disabilities. Specifically, in Section 2, we will review the literature on intellec-
tual disabilities, museum accessibility, and multisensory experiences. Further,
Section 3 will present our objectives, implementation, and interaction and gam-
ification plan. Section 4 will present the evaluation of a multisensory experience
diorama designed for a museum exhibition. We will also discuss our findings in
Section 5. Finally, we conclude this paper and highlight limitations and future
considerations in Section 6.
2
Background and Related work
Intellectual Disabilities (ID) are neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by
deficits in cognition and adaptive functioning [1]. The severity can vary widely,
with some people facing minor issues and being able to live relatively indepen-
dently with the right support, while others may need significant and perma-
nent assistance [26]. Assistance is especially needed in the context of formal
and informal education [20], as learning can be difficult for individuals with ID
without accommodations or modifications [15]. This is due, in part, to intellec-
tual function limits, which may include issues with abstract concepts, memory,
problem-solving, planning, reasoning, and generalization [1][9][32].
In recent efforts to provide inclusive interactive technologies, the multisen-
sory approach has received special attention [16]. Multisensoriality for people
with disabilities has been employed with different applications, ranging from
multisensory smart objects [24][2][13] to multisensory environments [18][5][25],
and with different goals, such as relaxation [10], communication [24], and learn-
ing [2]. Indeed, multiple sensory modalities can benefit learning [29] as they
present information that can be more accessible according to the preferences of
the learner [21], enhancing learning opportunities for everyone [4]. Multisensory
experiences can also be found in museums, where multisensory technology creates
immersive experiences and empowers imagination [11]. Regarding accessibility,
multisensory solutions typically focus on visual impairments [19], as visual in-
formation constitutes the majority of museums’ content [11], and visitors with
ID received less attention in HCI technologies.
When it comes to enhancing learning experiences, natural history museums
frequently employ dioramas [12][31], which are "three-dimensional depictions of
animal-landscape sceneries that include real or artificial models of animals in
combination with background paintings and natural or artificial requisites" [14].
Because of their educational value [30], their potential in relation to HCI has
been investigated to understand how technology could enhance dioramas. Al-
though museums are the most common setting for digital dioramas, there are
also applications set in schools to provide hands-on experience with science con-

Multisensory Diorama (MSD)
3
cepts [27][3][6]. Aside from traditional physical ones [27][3][28], there are virtual
reality dioramas [22][6][23], augmented reality dioramas [7][17][23], and mixed re-
ality dioramas [8]. Interaction is typically achieved through external controllers
[27][22][6][8][28][23], with only a few opting for physical interaction [7][17][3],
highlighting a lack of multimodality. Similarly, there is a lack of multisensorial-
ity. The sensory output of digital dioramas is primarily visual, with occasional
incorporation of auditory feedback [7][3][28] and even less frequent incorporation
of haptic output [28]. The latter is the only one designed specifically for people
with disabilities, explicitly those with visual impairment. The target users of
digital dioramas are not always specified because they are appealing to a wide
range of people [22][8][23], but when the design is specific to a defined population,
targets are usually children [7][17][3][6].
3
Design
3.1
Rationale and objectives
Thanks to informal learning, museums can provide an effective informal alterna-
tive learning environment for people with ID. In particular, dioramas can provide
explicit and immersive representations of information that can be more easily
understood. After visiting a Natural History museum with people with ID and
observing their reactions to playful interactions, we conducted a focus group
session with a psychologist, educators, and the museum’s researcher. Together
we explored the feasibility, requirements, and features of a tangible interactive
object to place inside the museum. Inspired by the literature and the museum’s
content, we envisioned a Multisensory Diorama (MSD) focused on the food chain.
As the group of participants was going to learn content about wolves and rein-
deer, the educator suggested focusing on that topic and proposing an activity
that could be placed inside their learning process. Following the focus group,
the content of the museum, and accounting for the learning objectives of the
participants, we extracted the key considerations that should have been taken
into account during the design phase:
1. Engagement: The diorama should be designed to be interactive and en-
gaging for the participants, to involve them in a memorable and meaningful
learning experience;
2. Accessibility: The diorama should propose multisensory feedback to ac-
commodate the specificities of the participant with ID. It should leave the
participant the possibility to choose how to engage with it and should be
easy to use;
3. Learning: The diorama should help contextualize and consolidate previous
knowledge.
3.2
Implementation
The MSD presented in this paper is a portable box with the scenery on top and
the electronics inside. To recreate the landscape, a green textured cloth miming

4
L. S. Guedes et al.
grass covers the surface. On the front are three cards with pictures and names of
mouse, moss, and reindeer. Each card has its own RFID reader housed inside the
box. Red and green LEDs are on the left side of the box and next to the cards.
Statuettes of wolves and reindeer occupy the middle portion of the surface, and
two of them stand on a white card-shaped RFID tag. Paper trees with thin
branches and leaves that can easily shake with wind serve as a backdrop for the
game. The wind is generated by a small fan located directly behind the trees.
It can be activated by a photoresistor placed among the trees and a button on
the diorama’s left side. RFID readers, LEDs, the fan, the photoresistor, and the
button are all connected to an Arduino Uno, which is equipped with an MP3
shield, a speaker, and an external battery. Fig. 1a shows the components.
Fan
Photoresistor
Textures
RFID sensor
Speaker
LEDs
Button
Vibromotor
RFID tag
(a) Components available on the MSD.
(b) MSD in the Museum.
Fig. 1: MSD: Components’ description and the box inside the museum.
3.3
Interaction and Gamification
The MSD offers visitors an interactive experience in a forest setting, where they
can observe wolves and reindeer. The diorama is designed to provide two differ-
ent ways of engagement and interaction, allowing visitors to choose their own
experience and make their visit more memorable. Visitors can explore the aug-
mented landscape, where they can touch the MSD’s elements to discover their
textures, activate the wind, and move the animals. This allows visitors to ex-
perience the forest environment hands-on and understand the different elements
that make up the ecosystem. They can also play imaginative games set in the
forest, which will make the experience more fun and creative.
In addition, visitors can play a matching game that reinforces their knowledge
of the food chain in the forest. The game is based on the prompt "Who eats
what?" and visitors can pick up the animals from the scenery and place them
on top of the image of their food. The answers provided are mouse, moss, and
reindeer. If the participant selects the wolf, the correct answers would be mouse
and reindeer. However, if the participant selects the reindeer, moss is the correct
answer. When the answer was wrong, a red LED lit up, and a feedback sound was

Multisensory Diorama (MSD)
5
played, encouraging participants to try again. On the other hand, if the answer
was correct, a green LED lit up, and the speakers played a sound associated with
the animal. Every time a match was made, the diorama vibrated. The game is
designed to reinforce knowledge about the different animals and their role in the
ecosystem in an interactive way. The simple mechanic and interaction are meant
to enhance accessibility and improve understandability.
4
Evaluation
4.1
Method
To evaluate the accessibility and engagement of the MSD, we conducted a study
at a Natural History museum. Participants were first given a tour of the museum
room with the wolf and the reindeer and were given a brief refresher on the
animals featured in the diorama. Afterward, the MSD (Fig. 1b) was placed on
a table between the animal statuettes and a stool was provided for participants
to sit on. The participants then entered the room individually for a one-on-one
session with two researchers present. One researcher was leading the experience
and was standing beside the participant to guide them through the activity, while
the other researcher was standing in the corner of the room, taking notes on the
participant’s interactions and observations and filming the experiment for further
analysis. Participants were first given the opportunity to explore the diorama
freely. We then provided a brief overview of the MSD and its purpose, and later,
the leading researcher presented the matching game promptly. The researcher
handed the animal with the tag and asked the participant to place it on its food.
At the end of the session with the MSD, the researcher showed participants
any interaction that they hadn’t tried at the beginning of the session. Finally,
we requested that participants exercise their free will in selecting between the
MSD and other familiar options, including a Museum app, an Augmented Reality
app, printed easy-to-read text, and augmentative and alternative communication
(AAC) pictograms. They were asked to choose their preferred option in sequence
until the final alternative. After the session, participants were interviewed by an
educator in a separate room, where they were asked to describe the diorama,
the activity, and express their opinions about it. This approach allowed us to
gather valuable feedback on the accessibility and engagement of the MSD and
make any necessary adjustments for future implementations.
4.2
Participants
The study involved a sample of 12 adults with ID, 8 women and 4 men, who
were chosen to participate in a museum visit by their educator from the same
association. It was made possible by an ongoing agreement between the partic-
ipants’ association and the research organization involved and formal approval
from the ethical committee of the researchers’ institution. The association en-
sured that both legal guardians and participants knew the research purpose and

6
L. S. Guedes et al.
that participation was voluntary. This was an important aspect of the study
as it ensured that all participants were willing and able to participate in the
experience. Three participants had a mild disability (P3, P5, P10), eight had a
moderate disability (P1, P2, P4, P6, P8, P9, P11, P12), and one had a severe
disability (P7), providing a representative sample of the population. Regarding
age, 2 participants were under 40, 4 were between 40 and 50, and 6 were over
50. To ensure that all participants were comfortable during the study, frequent
reminders were given that they could opt out of the activity at any time. This
was an important step as it ensured that participants were not feeling pressured
to continue the activity if they were uncomfortable with it. For non-verbal or
minimally verbal participants, their educators were present to ensure that their
needs were understood and that they felt comfortable throughout the experience.
5
Findings and Discussion
5.1
Initial observations
Participants were initially free to explore the diorama. We analyzed and clustered
data based on similarities in behavior. Some participants (P1, P3, P7) focused
more on physical interaction with the elements, such as touching and feeling,
while (P2, P4, P5, P6, P8, P9, P10, P12) focused more on verbal expression
and describing what they see or experience. P11 is initially more cautious and
skeptical of the diorama and needs help to relax and understand what we are
proposing.
We now look at accessibility, engagement, and learning during exploration
and playing with the diorama via participant observations and feedback.
5.2
Exploration
Several similarities were observed in participants’ exploration behaviors. A few
participants described the elements they saw, such as in P1, P4, and P5, while
others pointed at them and named them, as seen in P6 and P12. Many partic-
ipants interacted with the wind, expressing enjoyment, surprise, or fascination
with it, as evidenced in P2, P3, P4, P6, P8, and P12. Some participants explored
the exhibit independently, as observed in P8 and P9, while others needed some
prompting, such as in P6 and P10. P10 mentioned, "I am confused with the
mouse" and later on highlighted when the fan was activated "as if it was the
wind of nature." Ultimately, P11 expressed curiosity about the exhibit’s purpose
or mechanisms.
5.3
Independence and Accessibility
Most participants were able to access the diorama and complete their assigned
tasks independently. Nonetheless, some participants required different levels of
assistance to complete the game. Three participants (P7, P8, P12) were found

Multisensory Diorama (MSD)
7
to be primarily independent but required some form of guidance or assistance,
such as specifying where to place a statuette or correcting the placement of a tag
on the reader. One participant required scaffolding to complete the game (P9),
and another needed help to start (P11).
5.4
Understanding and Learning
Participants showed a good understanding of the feedback provided in the game,
either through sound or light. Some participants found the light feedback more
immediate and noticeable than the sound feedback. When prompted P12 said,
"It’s not right because red means mistake." Several participants used the feed-
back to correct their following answer, while others understood that the green
light meant a correct answer and moved to the next spot. P1 says when play-
ing, "One reindeer doesn’t eat another reindeer. That doesn’t make sense." One
participant (P11) required scaffolding to understand the game. The vibration
was the least noticeable. Participants could feel it when touching the statuettes
during the game’s feedback.
5.5
Gaming Experience
Most participants demonstrated an understanding of right and wrong answers by
saying out loud what was going to happen, before waiting for the matching game
feedback. P12 is sure about her answers and proud to get them right, saying:
"You see?!?" Two participants (P9 and P11) needed help playing the game. P3
explained the gaming experience "I didn’t know if it was correct, but I wanted
to try. The light told me it was right."
5.6
Emotions and Engagement
Participants exhibited a range of emotions during gameplay. P1, P7, and P12
were surprised and enthusiastic, with P1 expressing excitement at discovering
new features "I really liked the box, did you know?" P2, P4, P6, P10, and P11
smiled during gameplay, with P6 smiling specifically at the feedback, P10 while
playing with the reindeer statuette, and P11 while discovering what the box did.
P5 was generally serious, while P9 was curious and spent time looking closely
at the objects.
5.7
Preferences
We asked participants to freely choose which solution they would like to use to
learn more about the museum content. They had five alternatives, three high-
tech (Museum app, Augmented Reality app, and the MSD) and two low-tech
(printed easy-to-read text and AAC pictograms). MSD was the second preference
of 5 participants (P3, P6, P7, P11, P12), the third preference of 3 participants
(P1, P2, P10), and the fourth (P5 and P8) and last (P4 and P9) of two. When
placed as second or third place, the MSD was always chosen after a high-tech
solution, proving the engagement and interest in technology by people with ID.

8
L. S. Guedes et al.
5.8
Interview
After each one-on-one session, the participants were asked about what they saw
without any extra prompt, they were free to express what they remembered.
They all described the box and various animals, the reindeer and the wolves. P3
mentioned "stickers" indicating the game alternatives glued on top of the box,
while P4 and P5 provided detailed descriptions of the LEDs, fan, and wind, as
well as their interactions with the box. P9 noted the presence of "fake moss,"
and P10 mentioned the "reindeer and wolf family."
We asked participants to describe their experience with the MSD in detail
and prompted, if necessary, with the following questions: were there any noises or
sounds? Did you have something to read? Were there any pictures? Were there
any lights? Could you do something with the box? Many participants mentioned
lights that turned green when they gave a correct answer and red when they gave
an incorrect answer. Some participants also reported hearing animal sounds, such
as the wolf howling or the reindeer making noise. Several participants described
feeling the wind on their hands or seeing leaves move when they touched a
specific box area. Participants appeared engaged and enjoyed interacting with
the various elements, such as guessing which animals the wolf and reindeer should
eat. However, there were also some differences in their experiences, such as one
participant who reported not hearing any noises (P3) and another who did not
see any lights in the box (P11).
Lastly, during the interview, the educators asked about the participants’
favorite technology. A few participants said they enjoyed the tablet (with the
museum or AR app) and the easy-to-read texts. P2, P6, P7, P8, P9, and P10
highlighted the box and its features. P4 answered, "I liked the pictures," which
could be related to any of the alternatives they had in the hall. Additionally, one
participant (P3) noted that he liked everything.
6
Conclusions
This study aimed to propose and evaluate the effectiveness of a MSD designed to
enhance accessibility and interaction in the museum environment. The MSD was
an innovative and inclusive way for people with ID to learn about the museum
content, providing participants with multisensory experiences that allow for in-
teractive and fun informal learning. Nevertheless, the study had limitations, such
as noise inside the museum that disturbed the audio feedback experience and the
museum hall with stimuli everywhere. As a result, future work should focus on
evaluating new multisensory feedback and increasing speakers’ volume. Overall,
the results of this study suggest that the MSD successfully engaged participants
and elicited a range of responses and behaviors, making it a promising approach
for enhancing museum learning experiences.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank our amazing participants from
ANFFAS and SNSF for funding this research.

Multisensory Diorama (MSD)
9
References
1. American Psychiatric Association, A., Association, A.P., et al.: Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5, vol. 10. Washington, DC: American
psychiatric association (2013)
2. Brule, E., Bailly, G., Brock, A., Valentin, F., Denis, G., Jouffrais, C.: Mapsense:
multi-sensory interactive maps for children living with visual impairments. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. pp.
445–457 (2016)
3. Cools, S., Conradie, P., Ciocci, M.C., Saldien, J.: The diorama project: development
of a tangible medium to foster steam education using storytelling and electronics.
In: Conference on Smart Learning Ecosystems and Regional Development. pp.
169–178. Springer (2017)
4. Eardley, A.F., Mineiro, C., Neves, J., Ride, P.: Redefining access: Embracing multi-
modality, memorability and shared experience in museums. Curator: The Museum
Journal 59(3), 263–286 (2016)
5. Frid, E., Lindetorp, H., Hansen, K.F., Elblaus, L., Bresin, R.: Sound forest: evalu-
ation of an accessible multisensory music installation. In: Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1–12 (2019)
6. Gambini, A., Pezzotti, A., Broglia, A., Poli, A.: The digital diorama project: the
design. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 182, 470–476 (2015)
7. Harrington, M.C.: Connecting user experience to learning in an evaluation of an
immersive, interactive, multimodal augmented reality virtual diorama in a natural
history museum & the importance of story. In: 2020 6th International Conference
of the Immersive Learning Research Network (iLRN). pp. 70–78. IEEE (2020)
8. Hayashi, O., Kasada, K., Narumi, T., Tanikawa, T., Hirose, M.: Digital diorama
system for museum exhibition. In: 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed
and Augmented Reality. pp. 231–232. IEEE (2010)
9. Henry, L.A., MacLean, M.: Working memory performance in children with and
without intellectual disabilities. American journal on mental retardation 107(6),
421–432 (2002)
10. Hogg, J., Cavet, J., Lambe, L., Smeddle, M.: The use of ‘snoezelen’as multisen-
sory stimulation with people with intellectual disabilities: a review of the research.
Research in developmental disabilities 22(5), 353–372 (2001)
11. Hornecker, E., Ciolfi, L.: Human-computer interactions in museums. Synthesis lec-
tures on human-centered informatics 12(2), i–171 (2019)
12. Insley, J.: Little landscapes: dioramas in museum displays. Endeavour 32(1), 27–31
(2008)
13. Jost, C., Le Pévédic, B., El Barraj, O., Uzan, G.: Mulsebox: Portable multisensory
interactive device. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics (SMC). pp. 3956–3961. IEEE (2019)
14. Kamcke, C., Hutterer, R.: History of dioramas. In: Natural history dioramas, pp.
7–21. Springer (2015)
15. Kauffman, J.M., Hallahan, D.P., Pullen, P.C., Badar, J.: Special education: What
it is and why we need it. Routledge (2018)
16. Kientz, J.A., Hayes, G.R., Goodwin, M.S., Gelsomini, M., Abowd, G.D.: Interactive
technologies and autism. Synthesis lectures on assistive, rehabilitative, and health-
preserving technologies 9(1), i–229 (2019)
17. Kyriakou, P., Hermon, S.: Can i touch this? using natural interaction in a mu-
seum augmented reality system. Digital Applications in Archaeology and Cultural
Heritage 12, e00088 (2019)

10
L. S. Guedes et al.
18. Lancioni, G., Cuvo, A., O’reilly, M.: Snoezelen: an overview of research with people
with developmental disabilities and dementia. Disability and rehabilitation 24(4),
175–184 (2002)
19. Lloyd-Esenkaya, T., Lloyd-Esenkaya, V., O’Neill, E., Proulx, M.J.: Multisensory
inclusive design with sensory substitution. Cognitive Research: Principles and Im-
plications 5, 1–15 (2020)
20. Mastrogiuseppe, M., Guedes, L.S., Landoni, M., Span, S., Bortolotti, E.: Technol-
ogy use and familiarity as an indicator of its adoption in museum by people with
intellectual disabilities. Studies in health technology and informatics 297, 400–407
(2022)
21. Mount, H., Cavet, J.: Multi-sensory environments: an exploration of their potential
for young people with profound and multiple learning difficulties. British Journal
of Special Education 22(2), 52–55 (1995)
22. Nakaya, T., Yano, K., Isoda, Y., Kawasumi, T., Takase, Y., Kirimura, T.,
Tsukamoto, A., Matsumoto, A., Seto, T., Iizuka, T.: Virtual kyoto project: Digital
diorama of the past, present, and future of the historical city of kyoto. In: Culture
and computing, pp. 173–187. Springer (2010)
23. Narumi, T., Kasai, T., Honda, T., Aoki, K., Tanikawa, T., Hirose, M.: Digital
railway museum: An approach to introduction of digital exhibition systems at
the railway museum. In: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Hu-
man Interface and the Management of Information: Information and Interaction
for Learning, Culture, Collaboration and Business - Volume Part III. p. 238–247.
HCI’13, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg (2013)
24. Neidlinger, K., Koenderink, S., Truong, K.P.: Give the body a voice: Co-design with
profound intellectual and multiple disabilities to create multisensory wearables. In:
Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. pp. 1–6 (2021)
25. Parés, N., Carreras, A., Durany, J., Ferrer, J., Freixa, P., Gómez, D., Kruglanski,
O., Parés, R., Ribas, J.I., Soler, M., et al.: Mediate: An interactive multisensory
environment for children with severe autism and no verbal communication. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Workshop on Virtual Rehabilitation. vol. 81,
pp. 98–99 (2004)
26. Patel, D.R., Apple, R., Kanungo, S., Akkal, A.: Intellectual disability: definitions,
evaluation and principles of treatment. Pediatric Medicine 1(11), 10–21037 (2018)
27. Ritzel, C., Sentic, A.: Investigating energy prosumer behaviour in crowd energy
using an interactive model/diorama. Journal of Electronic Science and Technology
16(4), 341–350 (2018)
28. Samaroudi, M., Rodriguez-Echavarria, K., Song, R., Evans, R.: The fabricated dio-
rama: Tactile relief and context-aware technology for visually impaired audiences.
In: GCH. pp. 201–206 (2017)
29. Shams, L., Seitz, A.R.: Benefits of multisensory learning. Trends in cognitive sci-
ences 12(11), 411–417 (2008)
30. Tunnicliffe, S.D., Scheersoi, A.: Dioramas as important tools in biological educa-
tion. In: Natural History Dioramas, pp. 133–143. Springer (2015)
31. Tunnicliffe, S.D., Scheersoi, A.: Natural history dioramas. History Construction
and Educational Role, Dordrecht (2015)
32. Wehmeyer, M.L., Buntinx, W.H., Lachapelle, Y., Luckasson, R.A., Schalock, R.L.,
Verdugo, M.A., Borthwick-Duffy, S., Bradley, V., Craig, E.M., Coulter, D.L., et al.:
The intellectual disability construct and its relation to human functioning. Intel-
lectual and developmental Disabilities 46(4), 311–318 (2008)
View publication stats

