Lindenwood University 
Lindenwood University 
Digital Commons@Lindenwood University 
Digital Commons@Lindenwood University 
Faculty Scholarship 
Research and Scholarship 
2-8-2023 
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote 
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote 
Inclusivity and Engagement 
Inclusivity and Engagement 
James Hutson 
Lindenwood University, jhutson@lindenwood.edu 
Piper Hutson 
Lindenwood University, phutson@lindenwood.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.lindenwood.edu/faculty-research-papers 
 Part of the Educational Technology Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Hutson, James and Hutson, Piper, "Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote 
Inclusivity and Engagement" (2023). Faculty Scholarship. 452. 
https://digitalcommons.lindenwood.edu/faculty-research-papers/452 
This Book Chapter is brought to you for free and open access by the Research and Scholarship at Digital 
Commons@Lindenwood University. It has been accepted for inclusion in Faculty Scholarship by an authorized 
administrator of Digital Commons@Lindenwood University. For more information, please contact 
phuffman@lindenwood.edu. 

1
Chapter
Museums and the Metaverse: 
Emerging Technologies to Promote 
Inclusivity and Engagement
James Hutson and Piper Hutson
Abstract
Over the past two decades, museums have increasingly sought to build connections 
with the community and increase inclusivity of visitors. At the same time, emerging 
technologies, such as extended reality (XR) and virtual museums (VM) are increas-
ingly adopted to engage with different generational expectations but also for the pur-
poses of supporting inclusivity and neurodiverse populations. First such technologies 
were adopted to augment exhibitions in the physical museum space for edutainment. 
Since then, XR has expanded from room-size environments (CAVEs) and augmented 
exhibitions to the creation of entire virtual museums, such as The Museum of Pure 
Form and The Virtual Museum of Sculpture. Digital twins of museums are increas-
ingly common, along with UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Such virtual experiences 
can be leveraged to prepare neurodiverse visitors prior to visiting a museum. This 
chapter will outline how existing approaches to social stories and sensory maps may 
be combined with XR experiences to support neurodiverse visitors and their families. 
While onsite, immersive technologies can be used both for engagement and to provide 
accommodations for greater inclusivity and diversity.
Keywords: neurodiversity, social stories, sensory maps, museums, ASD
1. Introduction
In times of public health crises when travel becomes restricted, public spaces close, 
and anxiety over an uncertain future spread, institutions must adopt an agile mindset 
to continue to engage with their constituents in innovative ways. At the same time, 
such events as the global spread of COVID-19, which the World Health Organization 
(WHO) classified a pandemic on March 11, 2020, promote human resilience and 
spur innovative solutions to emerging problems that find application beyond their 
immediate intended use cases. Such was the case for cultural heritage institutions who 
had to quickly pivot to find new ways for the public to engage with their collections. 
The call to stay home and limit large gatherings of people led museums, galleries, 
and cultural heritage sites to close around the globe almost overnight. For instance, 
the Smithsonian announced all 19 of its related institutes, museums, and even the 
National Zoo would close to the public on March 14, 2020 [1, 2].

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
2
At first, front-of-house staff were repurposed in other areas, such as helping to 
catalog and digitize collections [3]. But as the pandemic wore on, there was increased 
pressure for furloughs and then layoffs among museum staff and educators [4]. To 
stave off further loss of human capital and retain public engagement with sites and 
collections across the globe, many museums turned to emerging technologies. For 
instance, The Louvre in Paris spent much of the year digitizing and then releasing over 
480,000 pieces from its collection in 2021 on their platform, while the work began 
in 2017 for digitizing UNESCO World Culture Heritage Sites would provide remote 
access to global locations cut off by border closures and travel bans in 2020 [5, 6].
An unprecedented investment in research and development followed with com-
panies such as Facebook (now Meta) to make extended reality (XR)—including 
augmented reality (AR), mixed reality (MR), and virtual reality (VR)—commercially 
available, user-friendly and affordable. The launch of the all-in-one head-mounted 
display (HMD) Oculus Quest 2 (released October 13, 2022) represents a watershed 
moment for immersive experiences and the ability to engage the public [7]. At the same 
time, advancements were made in digital twin technologies. While previous photogram-
metric techniques would require thousands of individual photographs painstakingly 
stitched together manually to create 3D models of objects or spaces, the latest generation 
of software compiles millions of individual images automatically [8]. The latest hand-
held scanners, such as Scantech, can also be used to produce high-resolution digital 
twins of objects, complete with precise colors and textures [9]. Both VR HMD and 
digital twin systems are now highly portable, user-friendly, and affordable. These tech-
nologies are now poised to work in tandem to create high-fidelity recreations of objects 
and historical sites and view in an immersive environment anywhere in the world.
The advances in technology coupled with the demand for virtual experiences 
accelerated by the global pandemic have led to an unprecedented effort to digitize 
museum collections and create digital twins of locations globally. The initial impetus 
for such projects was to allow for access to locations that were closed to promote 
social distancing and to incentivize future tourism in general [10]. However, as this 
chapter will outline, the availability of digital versions of spaces and objects contained 
within and the hardware to view prior to and during visitation can now be leveraged 
to support inclusivity and accessibly efforts for neurodiverse populations in cultural 
heritage institutions. Efforts to support diverse populations with a variety of needs 
have dominated scholarship on museum studies since the last millennium. With an 
estimated 10% of the world’s population (650 million people) living with a disability, 
museums have introduced many strategies to promote accessibility. For instance, 
audio and visual aids have seen widespread adoption, including audio guides, cap-
tioning, and sign language interpretation for visitors who are blind, deaf, or hard 
of hearing. Accessible facilities include wheelchair ramps and elevators, as well as 
accessible restrooms and parking for those with mobility restrictions. And inclusive 
programming showcases underrepresented perspectives to celebrate diverse cultures 
and communities. However, the unique needs of neurodiverse visitors have only 
recently begun garnering attention [11, 12].
2. Neurodiversity and museums
The American Alliance of Museum (AAM) commissioned a study to review how 
inclusivity efforts were being implemented across institutions, as well as perceptions 
of such programming by both regular museum attendees and the public in general 

3
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
during the pandemic [13]. The results of the study were used to develop resources and 
strategies for museums, including primers for professionals to support efforts to pro-
mote diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion (DEAI). Support for such efforts 
have gained momentum with museum administrators and researchers, especially 
in addressing physical disabilities, however, the same call to action for supporting 
neurodiversity has yet to be headed. The lack of attention paid to this marginalized 
community becomes clear when reviewing AAM primers, which do not even mention 
neurodiversity [13]. Therefore, while advances in inclusivity efforts have been made 
with regards to ethnicity, culture, physical disability, race, religion, and gender, there 
remains a significant percentage of the population not considered [14–16]. With an 
estimated 15–20% of the global population considered to be neurodiverse, greater 
attention needs be paid to the specific needs of this group [17]. The population is also 
estimated to be growing. In 2022, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) reported that 1 in 44 children were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders 
(ASD). The rate of diagnosis makes this population one of the largest among those 
with disabilities [18].
Individuals with ASD are classified as having neurodevelopmental difficulties, 
which may include autism, ADHD, ADD and dyslexia as the most common co-occur-
ring diagnoses [18]. The different types and levels of social and intellectual abilities of 
the group require the diagnosis to use the term “spectrum disabilities” due to the way 
in which they can manifest. Despite such diversity in experiences and abilities, there 
are certain physiological considerations for museum professionals to consider when 
designing experiences that are inclusive. For example, those with ASD can find navi-
gating museum spaces challenging given crowds, unexpected audio modulation, and/
or lighting intensities [19]. Furthermore, museum challenges can include unforeseen 
vestibular sensory input from interactive exhibitions, close proximity of large crowds, 
and an overactive visual field.
The average museum going public may not experience stressors with sensory 
stimuli common in museums, such as noise, waiting in lines, crowds, or exhibition 
lighting, but those with sensory sensitivity may. Moreover, the 2001 Council for 
Museums, Archives, and Libraries identified that a fully accessible program should 
include many considerations associated with access, such as social, financial, emo-
tional, attitudinal, cultural, and/or educational [20]. Notably absent were sensory 
considerations of access. Therefore, Schwartz and Knowles recently recommend 
readjusting the list to expand considerations of sensory needs of visitors. Sensory 
sensitivities not only dissuade those with ASD from visiting certain locations, but also 
their families due to the potential negative social behaviors that might arise [21].
Addressing the needs of the neurodiverse population of visitors to museums has 
only recently entered the accessibility conversation. The broadest adoptions regard-
ing accommodations in institutions remain confined to physical accessibility with 
considerations for those with ASD emerging in the United Kingdom (UK) in large and 
established museums with resources [22]. Those programs that do exist that support 
accessibility for neurodiverse populations commonly use the following strategies:
1. Providing sensory-friendly experiences: Many museums are offering sensory-
friendly experiences or “quiet hours” for visitors who may be sensitive to loud 
noises or bright lights.
2. Providing sensory maps: Some museums provide a guide that highlights sensory-
friendly areas and features of a museum, such as quiet spaces, low lighting, and 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
4
tactile exhibits, as well as identifying potentially problematic areas with larger 
crowds or loud noises.
3. Offering audio guides and other accessibility technology: Some museums are offering 
audio guides and other forms of accessibility technology, such as apps, to help 
mitigate sensory input and modulate information to navigate the museum and 
access the exhibits.
4. Providing social stories and visual schedules: Some museums are providing social 
stories and visual schedules to help visitors with autism prepare for their visit 
and understand what to expect.
5. Training staff on neurodiversity: Many museums are training their staff on  
neurodiversity and how to best support visitors with a range of neurological  
conditions.
6. Providing alternative format materials: Many museums are providing alternative 
format materials such as large print, audio descriptions, and other multimedia 
experiences to make their exhibits and events more accessible to visitors with 
sensory processing.
A holistic approach to accessibility is being considered that addresses pre-visit 
planning and resources to familiarize visitors with sensory information and routes 
through unfamiliar locations [23, 24]. Support onsite can include accessibility 
maps, museum social stories, sunglasses, headphones, and even therapy putty 
[25]. Engaging a sensory sensitive audience now includes integrating kinesthetic 
or tactile exhibits and including “cool down” spaces with sensory modalities that 
allow individuals who are overstimulated to regulate their cognitive flexibility and 
extended the duration of the stay. Such areas are often equipped with therapy balls, 
mats, mood lighting, and sound modulation [26]. In certain programs, trained 
occupational therapy students run special sensory activities, and act as personal tour 
guides to support visitors and foster exhibit interactions [12]. Given that parents 
with children with autism report 70% higher rates of anxiety, isolation, and depres-
sion, the sense of well-being and belonging in the museum experience is significant 
and impactful [27].
One way a positive experience can be facilitated is to ensure preparedness for a 
visit. Research gathered indicates that families that feel prepared for the visit and pre-
pare all involved greatly affects the quality of the experience that follows [28]. One of 
the most common ways individuals and families prepare is gathering information via 
the internet. An institutions website, social media pages, and advocacy organizations 
all provide information to learn about an organization and neurodiverse program-
ming available there. The channels for disseminating information and social sharing 
are evident in that 35% of museums offer a mobile application (app). Therefore, the 
dialogical relationship between visitors and the museum is one that unfolds through 
storytelling—information is passed from the institution to visitors and, in turn, 
visitors provide feedback via social media. The development of this dialog is ongoing 
and helps create a personal story through the interactions prior to a visit and then 
shared thereafter [29]. But overcoming the anxiety of visiting an unknown loca-
tion and potential sensory processing issues once onsite is just the first step towards 
accessibility.

5
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
Studies have revealed that 44–52% of those diagnosed with ASD have additional 
learning disorders or difficulties. That being the case, once the population overcomes 
the physical barriers to entry, comprehending the educational material presented 
represents another obstacle [30–32]. Fortuitously, museums were prepared for the 
needs of diverse learners and already have a range of resources to assist. Through 
online resources and digital access, collections, exhibitions, and educational resources 
are available remotely and, once onsite, virtual tours, digital audio guides and other 
interactive digital experiences further understanding of curated content [33]. On the 
other hand, the digitizing of collections and digital twin mapping of museum spaces 
carried out during the pandemic was not carried out with the directive of creating 
inclusive experiences. As such, the content was created for the neurotypical popula-
tion at large [5, 6]. But these digital resources can be reconfigured and combined in a 
novel way with other strategies for inclusivity to assist individuals better understand 
the site they will visit and the societal expectations through the use of expanded 
digital storytelling [34].
3. Digital storytelling and museums
The use of storytelling as a method to convey information is an inherently human 
strategy and is counted among the oldest of social practices for communication and 
learning [35, 36]. With the expansion of digital technology, the way in which stories 
are delivered and received has been transformed and conceptualized into digital 
storytelling through various digital communication tools [37]. Instead of one medium 
used to tell a story, such as a speech, text, or video, digital storytelling often combines 
video, text, audio narration, and more into a multimodal experience. With the latest 
generation of emerging technologies in XR supported by artificial intelligence (AI), 
multimedia digital communication tools and hypermedia-supported tools can expand 
the limits of storytelling for museum goers and support neurodiverse populations 
[37–41]. This approach does not require investment in infrastructure or a radical 
reworking of current educational content to be effective.
Most institutions already provide accessible resources through a variety of 
mechanisms including their websites, social media accounts, digital applications, 
or traditional printed handouts of maps or museums guides. These resources are 
being coupled with mobility-enhancing systems using interactive digital storytelling, 
personalization and adaptability, and mixed media [42]. The new, enhanced experi-
ences have the potential to improve the attractiveness of not only cultural heritage 
sites and museums, but also act as a new conduit for interpretation, analysis, and 
cultural knowledge for diverse communities. Additionally, the innovative use of new 
digital technologies will provide new forms of cultural interactive experiences that are 
comfortable, sensory-friendly, and comprehensible to neurodiverse audiences.
While existing accessibility resources seek greater inclusivity in visitor experience, 
new considerations delivered via digital storytelling can serve to address obstacles 
for neurodiverse individuals. In general, inclusivity seeks to provide equal access to 
opportunities and resources for potentially marginalized populations. In order to be 
truly inclusive, these individuals must not only feel welcomed on location through 
accommodations, but also prior to the visit. An understanding of the travel logistics, 
parking, desired paths mapped by curatorial staff, sensory-friendly areas, and more can 
reduce anxiety of the unknown for those with ASD and assist with sensory processing 
hinderances before even entering the physical space of a museum itself. Providing such 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
6
information through existing technology and digital assets facilitated with expanded 
digital experiences leads to a better experience and retention of educational material 
presented onsite during regular operating hours [43]. While “Sensory Days” seek to offer 
experiences tailored to those with ASD, they inadvertently segregate the population from 
the general public and imply that “normal” visiting hours are not for them [44]. Through 
expanded digital experiences, a sense of belonging can be created where regular visiting 
hours are welcoming. In addition, the ability afforded through virtual walkthroughs 
and digital recreations of the location provides an opportunity to revisit the site, review 
educational materials provided, and encourages post-visit interactions through shar-
ing experiences on the institutions social media platforms. All of this instils conceptual 
anchors of memory and subsequent reinforcement of institutional messaging [25]. Other 
ways digital storytelling can support accessibility for neurodiverse visitors include:
1. Providing multiple ways to access information: Digital storytelling can provide 
different ways to access the same information, such as through text, audio, and 
video, to accommodate different learning styles and abilities.
2. Enhancing engagement: Interactive digital stories can engage visitors in a more 
 immersive and personalized way, allowing them to explore and learn at their 
own pace.
3. Creating a safe and inclusive environment: Digital storytelling can create a safe and 
inclusive environment for visitors with neurodiverse needs, by providing acces-
sible and inclusive design, and allowing visitors to control their own pace and 
level of engagement with the museum’s content.
4. Accessibility features: Digital storytelling can be enhanced with accessibility 
features such as closed captioning, Audio Description, and sign language 
interpretation which can support visitors with different abilities.
Digital storytelling can thus allow visitors to personalize their experiences by 
providing a wide range of options, tailored to their specific needs, interests, and 
preferences, making the experience more engaging and inclusive. In a technology-
driven age, museums are seeking a variety of these tools using XR to stay current with 
the ways their visitors are engaging with the world in their daily lives.
The ways in which museums are seeking to tell stories with technology include 
digital tour guides, AR and Bluetooth technologies, and smart museums. The inte-
gration of digital tour guides is becoming more commonplace, and companies are 
looking to support this adoption. Examples such as Mobile Tour App and Digital 
Guide System are digital solutions that allow museums to embed their own images, 
videos, and audio of their collections for visitors to experience [45]. The multimedia 
component allows for greater memory retention than traditional storytelling by 
addressing different learning styles [46]. This new form of content delivery combines 
participation commonly seen with computer or video games complete with automatic 
story generation and narration. For example, the British Museum uses AR in their 
mobile game A Gift for Athena (2014) for the Parthenon gallery using tablets that 
can be checked out. The game tasks visitors with finding specific statues based on an 
outline and rewards them with more information about the works prior to assigning 
another task to explore [47]. Furthermore, these digital tours need not be solely in 
person. Virtual experiences can also represent inclusive alternatives to traditional 

7
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
museum visits through the digital embodiment of historical characters and their 
stories that may also blend physical artifacts with the immersive experience [29]. In 
such a way, visitors can experience the rich tapestry of stories in museum collections 
prior to visiting (if at all) and have a greater understanding onsite.
Along the same lines as digital tour guides, smart museums are also eliminating 
physical barriers to their collections by allowing technological advancements to 
remove sensory barriers, as well. Smart museums, such as the Smart Museum of Art 
(Chicago) bring together traditional exhibitions with emerging technologies where 
the use of immersive technology seek to enhance how material on complex cultural 
heritage is delivered to visitors [48]. The use of technology to enhance visitor experi-
ence can include interactive exhibits, virtual reality experiences, and mobile apps that 
provide additional information and resources. Smart museums may also use technol-
ogy to collect data on visitor behavior and preferences, and to improve the overall 
management and operation of the museum. Overall, the goal of a smart museum is 
to make the museum visit more engaging, interactive, and personalized for visitors. 
The transition to becoming “smart” refers to the heterogeneous technologies allowing 
museum environment to become more interactive, innovative, and accessible [49].
Therefore, the infrastructure and ability to move past the elimination of mere 
physical barriers for museum accessibility exists. The developments support the 
call for greater attention to neurodiverse accessibility as only addressing physical 
disabilities and accessibility will no longer suffice. The new multisensory approach 
afforded by digital storytelling and smart museums is essential to remove barriers to 
learning as part of the museum experience [50]. Once sensory obstacles have been 
removed and/or minimized, personalized learning experiences can be tailored to each 
individual and material and spaces delivered by way of storytelling. At the same time, 
engaging visitors through multisensory approaches and considerations can bolster 
learning for stories are not limited to oral communication and are critical for the 
creation of an atmosphere through the senses.
The elicitation of emotions such as empathy enriches stories, maintaining the 
attention of the audience while also creating memorable experience one can become 
invested in [51]. Storytelling supports other cognitive factors that improve learning, 
including improving attention and time on task by keeping the listener engaged, 
and empathy through emotional identification with the subject providing a cogni-
tive framework to help understand and retain new information [52]. Drawing upon 
previous research, the following proposes leveraging the engaging nature of storytell-
ing and delivered through the new immersive and interactive digital experiences to 
mitigate various ASD symptoms that would prohibit access to and appreciation of 
cultural heritage in museums. The educational resources of social stories and sensory 
maps that have been created to support neurodiverse visitors with various sensory 
processing disorders (SPD) should be digitized. The proposed “storymap” combina-
tion can then be transformed into a digital expression and experience through digital 
storytelling strategies. Taken together, this digital storymap can provide support prior 
to the visit, onsite, and engage diverse audiences with personalized, story-driven nar-
ratives of museum collections, while supporting multisensory experiences.
4. Sensory maps and museums
Visual stories, or sensory maps, may be used prior to visitation to prepare visitors 
for what to expect onsite. Such sensory maps provide “descriptions of a particular 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
8
situation, event or activity, which include specific information about what to expect 
in that situation and why” ([53], p. 168). A sensory map is a guide that highlights 
sensory-friendly areas and features of a museum, such as quiet spaces, low light-
ing, and tactile exhibits. The resource can be a helpful tool for visitors with autism 
or sensory processing disorders (SPD). Research has noted that families with ASD 
children also have accompanying sensor processing and participation challenges 
40–90% greater than other populations [54]. Additionally, studies also confirm 
that even adults who are overresponsive to stimuli in the environment describe 
their museum visits as disorganized, overwhelming, irritating, and distracting. The 
situation may result in the need to cope by spending extensive periods of time alone 
in order to regulate their emotional state, and result in feelings of isolation and 
exhaustion [55].
Regardless of demographic considerations such as age, visitors with SPD are often 
grouped into two separate categories by museum and occupational therapy research-
ers as either sensory avoiders or sensory seekers [25]. Sensory avoiders are individuals 
with SPD who have a heightened sensitivity to certain stimuli, such as loud noises or 
certain textures. This population may avoid or have an aversion to certain types of 
sensory input, as it can be overwhelming or uncomfortable for them. Sensory seekers, 
on the other hand, are individuals with SPD who have a lower sensitivity to certain 
stimuli and may seek out more intense or varied sensory experiences. Individuals who 
seek stimuli may have a greater need for movement and touch, which often results 
in easily becoming board in environments. Both groups face challenges that might 
manifest as either unwanted behavior that elicit sensory input, such as a compulsion 
to move, bump into other visitors, maintaining an understanding of their presence 
in space, or, alternatively, actions that seek to avoid stimuli by covering ears due to 
noises, and/or difficulties retaining attention with multiple sensory inputs. In both 
cases, the individuals may have difficulty interpreting and processing sensory infor-
mation appropriately. Addressing the concern, sensory maps plot routes considering 
which galleries are most congested, loud noise areas, and potential tactile exhibitions 
in order to address the needs of both populations [21].
Understanding the different sensory processing subcategories and groups affected 
will assist museum administration in better serving these populations. For instance, 
the categories of sensory processing include: auditory (hearing), gustatory (or 
taste), tactile (touch), proprioception (body awareness), vestibular (balance), visual 
(sight), and olfactory (smell) referencing [56]. Furthermore, within SPD there are 
generally three subtypes of sensory processing—hypersensitivity, hyposensitivity, and 
general sensory overload.
1. Hypersensitivity, also known as over-responsivity, is a condition where an indi-
vidual is overly sensitive to certain sensory inputs. They may have an aversion to 
certain types of stimuli, such as loud noises or certain textures, and may avoid or 
have a strong negative reaction to them.
2. Hyposensitivity, also known as under-responsivity, is a condition where an indi-
vidual is less sensitive to certain sensory inputs. They may seek out more intense 
or varied sensory experiences and may have a greater need for movement and 
touch.
3. General sensory overload refers to an individual’s overall difficulty processing and 
interpreting sensory information correctly. They may have difficulty with tasks 

9
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
such as paying attention, staying organized, or completing activities of daily 
 living. They may have symptoms of both hypersensitivity and hyposensitivity.
Stimuli, or lack thereof, is of critical importance for supporting accessibility 
for these three populations. The heightened input from those with hypersensitiv-
ity requires sensitivity to and avoidance of highly stimulating areas of a museum, 
whereas those with hyposensitivity seek out tactile, auditory and other stimuli, and, 
finally, general sensory overload may have symptoms of both [57, 58]. The threshold 
for the number and amount of stimuli the nervous system can process is different for 
diverse populations and requires the ability to modulate said stimuli before, during, 
and after museum visits [59]. Given that the processing of stimuli and information is 
environmental, there has also been a call to reframe the concept of disability as relat-
ing to the environment instead of something inherently within the person experienc-
ing them [60].
In supporting such visitors, sensory maps can be made available in multiple for-
mats, such as printed, digital, or an app, and can be provided to visitors upon arrival 
or made available online in advance. The removal of future unknowns of a new loca-
tion, visitors can pre-plan excursions and reduce anxiety. The resource can reduce 
stress for both the neurodiverse individual and their entire family potentially visiting 
with them. Such maps can be downloaded onto mobile devices, such as smartphones 
or tablets, or printed before a planned visit. Examples include the Sensory Friendly 
Map of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (https://www.metmuseum.org/-/media/
files/events/programs/progs-for-visitors-with-disabilities/sensory-friendly-map.
pdf). Potential crowded areas are highlighted in sensory maps, as well as identify-
ing more high-traffic times of day and instances where there may be dramatic shifts 
in lighting. International institutions, such as the British Museum, have gone even 
further and included information on areas that might be potentially offensive to 
those with olfactory sensitivities, uniforms commonly worn by staff, identifying 
entrances and exits, and special events that might balloon attendance (https://www.
britishmuseum.org/sites/default/files/2019-11/British-Museum-Sensory-Map-PDF-
Download.pdf).
5. Social stories and museums
Like sensory maps, and often mistaken for them, social stories provide a social 
narrative about programming in a museum or cultural heritage institution. The term 
“social stories,” a term trademarked by Carol Gray in 1991, are short, simple descrip-
tions of a specific situation or activity, such as visiting a museum. These stories can be 
helpful for visitors with autism or other developmental disorders by providing a clear 
and predictable explanation of what to expect during a museum visit [61]. The goal is 
to not change the behavior of visitors, but to improve the individuals understanding 
of the events and the expectations. Originally devised with no visual stimuli as the 
subject or object of the resource, the inclusion of visual imagery was later revised 
based on an increased understanding and available research for those using the tool in 
2006 [62]. Examples include Social Stories: Spectrum Project (2017) at the San Diego 
Natural History Museum (https://www.sdnhm.org/visit/accessibility/social-stories/) 
and the Social Story at the Brandywine Museum of Art (https://www.brandywine.
org/museum/accessibility/social-story). Unlike sensory maps that provide sensory 
information about the environment, the narrative approach of social stories includes 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
10
all information about the environment, the adjustments that have been considered for 
the comfort of the visitor and a breakdown of each individual step that might limit 
access intellectually or socially for a visitor [63].
These social stories, otherwise known as social narratives, describe a situation 
that may be challenging for those with ASD where social behavior and cues are clearly 
identified. These narratives are used to inform those with socialization challenges of 
potentially difficult situations [64]. Museums and educational institutions like the 
Eugene Science Center Chicago Children’s Museum, Boston Children’s Museum and 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York have social narratives embedded on 
their websites that can be downloaded and printed as PDFs (e.g. https://bostonchil-
drensmuseum.org/visit/accessibility/; https://www.twentyonesenses.org/places/
united-states/il/chicago-1/chicago-childrens-museum/). These examples exhibit a 
storytelling strategy using therapeutic and educational mediations for the population 
in question. The brief narrative is presented using visual aids and text to reassure 
those of what to expect in a given social event, exchange, or activity. The resources 
are used as materials to learn how to promote the development of autonomy and learn 
social skills, including routines, understanding rules, and expectations.
Unfortunately, these social stories are generally found in the form of print media, 
which are outdated and do not fulfill their potential of full accessibility and inclu-
sion that other digital and virtual interventions and experiences now afford [64, 65]. 
Accessible interventions need to align with daily use cases of individuals outside of 
the museum context. As such, new AR and VR options are being created to meet users 
where they are. For instance, Wearable Immersive Virtual Reality (WIVR) technology 
has been leveraged to produce an innovative social story aptly named the Wearable 
Immersive Social Story (WISS) [66]. By integrating immersive social stories using 
AR and VR one is able to take advantage of 360° videos with embedded elements that 
are interactive. Visual cues that include audio, images, and geometric shapes make 
the experience more engaging and entertaining in order to gain a greater understand-
ing of the social expectations of visiting a specific institution. While digital media 
expands in museums to embed more multimedia experiences with images, video, 
and audio, VR can now be used more widely to assist those with ASD. However, these 
examples of immersive and wearable social stories remain confined to therapeutic 
and educational interventions for those with autism and include common use cases 
such as teaching students how to safely cross a road [67].
6. Sensory maps, social stories and adaptive extended reality
The future of accessibility will combine the resources and technology listed above. 
Sensory maps represent an educational tool to prepare those with ASD to engage 
with new situations and/or in new environments. The multisensory approach used 
to create sensory maps ensures that whether over- or under-stimulated, visitors will 
be prepared for the visit and to benefit from the educational materials provided. The 
currently exist in the form of handouts provided by an institution that takes into 
consideration how people perceive interacting with a space. Social stories, on the 
other hand, use a narrative approach to both deliver content and to address situational 
awareness for those with ASD. Taken together, the proposed combined “storymap” 
can now be transformed into a digital expression and experience. Digital storytell-
ing strategies can be used and experienced with various XR wearable devices. This 
immersive storymap can provide support prior to the visit, onsite, and engage diverse 

11
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
audiences with personalized, story-driven narratives of museum collections, while 
supporting adaptive, multisensory experiences.
Using the benefits of both sensory maps and social stories with VR, especially, 
enables those with sensory processing disorders, and other cognitive difficulties, to 
feel more comfortable in the museum space. Social stories can capitalize on existing 
avatar creators that are cross-platform and interoperable, such as Ready Player Me 
(https://readyplayer.me/) for a more immersive, enjoyable, and personalized experi-
ence. The use of avatars selected and created by a neurodiverse individual improve 
inclusivity through their use in virtual environments to better understand social 
contacts that may/ will occur onsite, familiarizing them with the facilities prior to 
visiting, and the rewarding recognition of accomplishment by completing a visit. As 
noted, the benefits of using head-mounted displays (HMD) and VR include improved 
focus and attention span as these remove the distractions of the outside world, which 
can be overwhelming for those with stimuli sensitivity [68].
There are several use cases already available that demonstrate the efficacy of 
integrating emerging immersive technologies into cultural heritage institutions. One 
such example is A Dip in the Blue (2022), an application (app) developed for museum 
visitors with ASD to provide a clear visual agenda along with additional accessibil-
ity resources [69]. The app uses a social story that is inspired by the experience of 
an archeologist discovering a tomb in Naples. After the experience, a survey gathers 
data on the emotional reaction and sensory feedback experienced as part of the tour. 
Additional, services and functional features within the app include a dashboard 
management panel, a live virtual tour scheduling system, a media library dedicated to 
storing documents, textual and multimedia contact like audio and video tours. There 
is additional socializing functionality built in with the ability to broadcast live streams 
of virtual tours.
Another example that uses interactive technologies, including mixed-reality, 
provides an interactive cultural visit of the church of Roncesvalles at the beginning 
of the popular tourist destination of Camino de Santiago [70]. The inclusion of 
avatars provides the ability for natural social interactions to further enhance the visit. 
The church is experienced onsite through the use of a three-dimensional projection 
mapping, while an agent generating conversation acts as a storyteller for visitors. The 
avatar of the storyteller uses the techniques of storytelling while exhibiting emotional 
reactions during their narration of local stories of the objects in the room. Therefore, 
the storytelling experience is supported by the engagement with actual objects in 
the environment and the emotional conversation avatar thus bridging the real and 
virtual. But what makes this experience unique is the considerations of mapping the 
senses.
Moving beyond merely the visual, future cultural experiences will include 
multisensory interactions. The importance of all of the senses for a truly immer-
sive experience has been well-documented [71, 72]. As such, a 2016 report of the 
Workshop in Cologne sought to understand how to map the senses and listed three 
steps [73]. The first step includes a researcher mapping a specific urban space to be 
recreated. The second includes the subjective experiences of visitors by capturing the 
emotions and feelings of the citizens connected to the location. And, finally, the third 
is the connection of the researcher to the local community. These steps shed light on 
the soundscape and smellscape that compliment a visual imagery of a place. Smells 
often provide a memory which helps identify a place and the effects of climate should 
be considered. For instance, cold weather reduces the expansion of smells whereas 
warm weather expands them [74]. Creating an adaptive experience that can not only 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
12
change based upon the environment represented, but also react to the physical and 
emotional states of visitors will become ever more important in crafting compelling 
virtual experiences.
Adaptive content and interactive storytelling will revolutionize museum experi-
ences. In order to make such experiences possible, the collection of biometrics of 
visitors will be required. Furthermore, adaptive content that adjusts to the needs of 
diverse audiences through new paradigms of interaction will provide accessible digital 
content to a wide range of visitors [75]. Researchers will need to use the following 
strategies to collect data to personalize avatars to craft custom-made experiences 
associated with museum visits.
1. Biometric data collection: This can include collecting data such as facial features, 
body measurements, and voice samples from visitors. This data can be used to 
create a 3D avatar of the visitor, which can be used in virtual reality and aug-
mented reality experiences.
2. Surveys and questionnaires: Museums can gather information about visitors’ 
preferences, interests, and background through surveys and questionnaires. This 
information can be used to tailor the content and activities of the museum visit 
to the individual visitor.
3. Tracking and monitoring: Museums can use technology such as RFID tags and 
cameras to track visitors’ movements and interactions within the museum. This 
data can be used to understand the visitor’s behavior, interests, and preferences 
and personalize the experience accordingly.
4. Social media integration: Museums can collect data from visitors’ social media 
profiles and use it to personalize the museum experience. For example, if a visi-
tor has a history of visiting similar museums or expressing interest in a certain 
topic, the museum could suggest exhibits or activities that align with those 
interests.
5. Personalized recommendations: Museums can use the data collected from the 
above methods to provide personalized recommendations for exhibits, activities, 
and other experiences within the museum. This can include suggesting exhibits 
that align with the visitor’s interests, providing personalized tours, or offering 
augmented reality experiences that bring the exhibits to life in a more interactive 
way.
6. Feedback: Museums can also gather feedback from visitors about their personal-
ized experiences and use that feedback to improve and refine the personalized 
experience in the future.
Examples of this in practice can already be seen in research projects like 
CHESS (Cultural Heritage Experiences through Socio-personal interactions and 
Storytelling). CHESS (https://chess.diginext.fr/) applies constant adaptable and per-
sonalized content to enhance the experience of the Acropolis Museum, Athens [76]. 
The onsite engagement with objects in the museum personalizes interactive stories 
for each visitor. The project was created to further enhance a visit by personalizing 
an engaging and interactive storytelling experience by adapting information about 

13
Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
cultural artifacts for each individual visitor. Thus, the latest generation of state-of-
the-art museum programming seeks to create cultural adventures that are driven 
by stories and narratives. Such experiences involve users in many roles of a scenario 
through multimodal interfaces and extends over time and space. This user-centered 
approach personalizes the educational experience with real-time adaptive capabilities 
using localization systems. The collapsing of space and time made possible through 
virtual connectivity means that one will also be able to engage in such experiences at 
home through various devices.
7. Conclusion
Museums will continue to adopt the latest emerging technology to engage with the 
all of their constituencies. As the goal of museums is to ensure accessibility for all, the 
needs of neurodiverse populations will continue to drive innovation and technological 
adoption. Digital storytelling strategies can now be used and experienced with vari-
ous immersive and wearable devices. New immersive storymaps can provide support 
prior to the visit, onsite, and engage diverse audiences with personalized, story-
driven narratives of museum collections, while supporting adaptive, multisensory 
experiences. The integration of narrative and storytelling in virtual environments 
encompasses both the needs to understand a given space physically and intellectu-
ally. Furthermore, these new digital tools are effective in visualizing and presenting 
historical and cultural heritage, and support staffing restrictions. The presentation 
through digital storytelling continues to evolve in use and methodology and is inher-
ently multimedia. Through the medium storytelling, digitized objects and virtual 
reconstructions of environments allow visitors to engage with the culture and history 
of a location or subject like never before. The pedagogical device generates a narrative 
through the experience of interactive events and affords visitors the ability to direct 
their own story and visit, creating meaning and context [77]. Systems will continue to 
evolve that create emotional connections with visitors, allowing for the preferences to 
be known and storytelling activities to adapt and evolve [70]. For example, detecting 
children in a room, a system could modify the age level of content and appearance 
of the avatar presenting said content; mini games may encourage interaction with 
objects in a given exhibition or gallery, while an avatar employs storytelling to invest 
the visitor in their history or significance. Finally, as the multiverse of metaverses 
evolves, portals will be created that link museum collections of like content that can 
be easily traversed for an even more expanded and immersive experience with art and 
culture.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
14
Author details
James Hutson* and Piper Hutson
Lindenwood University, Saint Charles, USA
*Address all correspondence to: jhutson@lindenwood.edu
© 2023 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), 
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original work is properly cited. 

Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
15
References
[1] Associated Press. Coronavirus Spreads 
to over 60 Countries. New Zealand 
Herald: France Closes the Louvre; 
2020. Available from: https://www.
nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.
cfm?c_id=2&objectid=12312989
[2] Daher N. Smithsonian museums 
to close amid coronavirus outbreak. 
SmithsonianMag.com. 2020. Available 
from: https://www.smithsonianmag.
com/smithsonian-institution/
smithsonian-museums–close-amid-
coronavirus-outbreak-180974399/
[3] Cobley J, Gaimster D, So S, Gorbey K, 
Arnold K, Poulot D, et al. Museums in 
the pandemic: A survey of responses 
on the current crisis. Museum Worlds. 
2020;8(1):111-134
[4] Krantz A, Downey S. The significant 
loss of museum educators in 2020: A data 
story. Journal of Museum Education. 
2021;46(4):417-429
[5] Longhi-Heredia SA, Marcotte P. The 
attractiveness of Quebec’s heritage sites 
in the era of Covid-19. Visual review. 
International Visual Culture Review/
Revista Internacional de Cultura Visual. 
2021;8(2):151-165
[6] Wildgans J. IP issues relating to 
cultural heritage platforms and new 
business models. In: Research Handbook 
on Intellectual Property and Cultural 
Heritage. Northampton, Massachusetts: 
Edward Elgar Publishing; 2022. 
pp. 480-501
[7] Raja M, Priya GG. Conceptual origins, 
technological advancements, and impacts 
of using virtual reality technology in 
education. Webology. 2021;18(2):116-134
[8] Brennan M, Christiansen L. Virtual 
materiality: A virtual reality framework 
for the analysis and visualization of 
cultural heritage 3D models. Digital 
Heritage. 2018:1-3
[9] Harrington MC, Jones C, Peters C. 
Virtual nature as a digital twin botanically 
correct 3D AR and VR optimized low-
polygon and photogrammetry high-
polygon plant models: A short overview 
of construction methods. In: ACM 
SIGGRAPH 2022 Educator’s Forum. New 
York, NY: Association for Computing 
Machinery; 2022. pp. 1-2
[10] Franczuk J, Boguszewska K, 
Parinello S, Dell’Amico A, Galasso F, 
Gleń P. Direct use of point clouds in 
real-time interaction with the cultural 
heritage in pandemic and post-pandemic 
tourism on the case of Kłodzko fortress. 
Digital applications in archaeology and 
cultural. Heritage. 2022;24:e00217
[11] Hutson P, Hutson J. Neurodivergence 
and inclusivity in cultural institutions: 
A review of theories and best practices. 
Creative Education. 2022;13(9):3069-3080
[12] Sokoloff RL, Schattschneider E. 
The Fight to Connect: Making Museums 
Accessible to Neurodiverse Communities 
(Doctoral dissertation, Brandeis 
University). 2022
[13] American Alliance of Museums. 
Audiences and inclusion: A primer for 
cultivating more inclusive attitudes 
among the public. Wilkening Consulting. 
2020:1-57
[14] Andermann J, Arnold-de SS. 
Museums and the educational turn: 
History, memory, inclusivity. Journal 
of Educational Media, Memory, and 
Society. 2012;4(2):1-7
[15] Pohawpatchoko C, Colwell C, 
Powell J, Lassos J. Developing a native 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
16
digital voice: Technology and inclusivity 
in museums. Museum Anthropology. 
2017;40(1):52-64
[16] Ariese C, Wróblewska M. Practicing 
Decoloniality in Museums: A Guide with 
Global Examples. Amsterdam, Holland: 
Amsterdam University Press; 2022
[17] Ott DL, Russo E, Moeller M. 
Neurodiversity, equity, and inclusion 
in MNCs. AIB Insights. 2022;22(3). 
Retrieved from: https://insights.aib.
world/article/34627-neurodiversity-
equity-and-inclusion-in-mncs
[18] Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). What is Autism 
Spectrum Disorder? (ASD). 2022. 
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/
ncbddd/autism/facts.html
[19] Nisticò V, Faggioli R, Tedesco R, 
Giordano B, Priori A, Gambini O, et al. 
Brief report: Sensory sensitivity is 
associated with disturbed eating in 
adults with autism Spectrum disorders 
without intellectual disabilities. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders. 2022:1-6. DOI: 10.1007/
s10803-022-05439-9
[20] Hooper-Greenhill E. Measuring 
learning outcomes in museums, 
archives and libraries: The learning 
impact research project (LIRP). 
International Journal of Heritage Studies. 
2004;10(2):151-174
[21] Schwartzman R, Knowles C.  
Expanding accessibility: Sensory 
sensitive programming for museums. 
Curator: The Museum Journal. 
2022;65(1):95-116
[22] Barclay DM. Traveling Different: 
Vacation Strategies for Parents of 
the Anxious, the Inflexible, and the 
Neurodiverse. Washington, DC:  
Rowman & Littlefield; 2022
[23] Brule E, Bailly G, Brock A,  
Valentin F, Denis G, Jouffrais C. 
MapSense: Multi-sensory interactive 
maps for children living with visual 
impairments. In: Proceedings of the 
2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. New 
Orleans, LA. 2016. pp. 445-457
[24] Cho H, Jolley A. Museum 
education for children with disabilities: 
Development of the nature senses 
traveling trunk. Journal of Museum 
Education. 2016;41(3):220-229
[25] Fletcher TS, Blake AB, Shelffo KE. 
Can sensory gallery guides for children 
with sensory processing challenges 
improve their museum experience? 
Journal of Museum Education. 
2018;43(1):66-77
[26] Kubasova TS. State Darwin Museum 
support programs for children with 
ASD and developmental disorders. 
Autism and Developmental Disorders. 
2022;20(2):13-19
[27] Silverman F, Bartley B,  
Cohn E, Kanics IM, Walsh L. 
Occupational therapy partnerships 
with museums: Creating inclusive 
environments that promote participation 
and belonging. International Journal of 
the Inclusive Museum. 2012;4(4):15-30
[28] Coffey CS. Creating Inclusive 
Experiences in Children’s Museums for 
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder 
(Doctoral dissertation, The University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee). 2018
[29] Dal Falco F, Vassos S. Museum 
experience design: A modern storytelling 
methodology. The Design Journal. 
2017;20(sup1):S3975-S3983
[30] Madge C. Autism in museums: 
Welcoming families and young people. 
Kids in Museums. 2021. Available 

Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
17
from: https://www.museumnext.com/
article/how-can-museums-increase-
accessibility-for-neurodiverse-
audiences/?adlt=strict
[31] Giri A, Aylott J, Giri P, 
Ferguson-Wormley S, Evans J. Lived 
experience and the social model 
of disability: Conflicted and inter-
dependent ambitions for employment 
of people with a learning disability and 
their family carers. British Journal of 
Learning Disabilities. 2022;50(1):98-106
[32] Mammarella IC, Cardillo R, 
Semrud-Clikeman M. Do comorbid 
symptoms discriminate between 
autism spectrum disorder, ADHD 
and nonverbal learning disability? 
Research in Developmental Disabilities. 
2022;126:104242
[33] Hawkey R. Learning with Digital 
Technologies in Museums, Science 
Centres and Galleries. Bristol, UK: Nesta 
Futurelab; 2004
[34] Nicolaou C. The secret power 
of digital storytelling methodology: 
Technology-enhanced learning utilizing 
audiovisual educational content. 
In: Enhancing Education through 
Multidisciplinary Film Teaching 
Methodologies. Hershey, Pennsylvania: 
IGI Global; 2023. pp. 235-246
[35] Bratitsis T, Ziannas P. From 
early childhood to special education: 
Interactive digital storytelling as a 
coaching approach for fostering social 
empathy. Procedia Computer Science. 
2015;67:231-240
[36] Nicolaou C, Kalliris G. Audiovisual 
Media Communications in Adult 
Education: The case of Cyprus and 
Greece of adults as adult learners. 
European Journal of Investigation in 
Health, Psychology and Education. 
2020;10(4):967-994
[37] Matsiola M, Dimoulas C, Kalliris G, 
Veglis AA. Augmenting user interaction 
experience through embedded 
multimodal media agents in social 
networks. In: Information Retrieval and 
Management: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications. Hershey, 
Pennsylvania: IGI Global; 2018. pp. 
1972-1993
[38] Sarridis I, Nicolaou C. Social 
media:(correct) professional use. 
In: Proceedings of the 2nd Student 
Conference of the Department of 
Applied Informatics. Vol. 2. Thessaloniki, 
Greece: University of Macedonia on 
Modern Entrepreneurship & Informatics 
Technologies; 2015
[39] Pilgrim J, Pilgrim JM. Immersive 
storytelling: Virtual reality as a cross-
disciplinary digital storytelling tool. In: 
Connecting Disciplinary Literacy and 
Digital Storytelling in K-12 Education. 
Hershey, Pennsylvania: IGI Global; 2021. 
pp. 192-215
[40] Matei SA, Hunter L. Data 
storytelling is not storytelling with data: 
A framework for storytelling in science 
communication and data journalism. The 
Information Society. 2021;37(5):312-322
[41] Liu M, Williams D, Pedersen S. Alien 
rescue: A problem-based hypermedia 
learning environment for middle 
school science. Journal of Educational 
Technology Systems. 2002;30(3):255-270
[42] Zhong Z, Coates H, Jinghuan S, 
editors. Innovations in Asian Higher 
Education. Oxfordshire, England, UK: 
Routledge; 2019
[43] Houston M. Facilitating digital 
transformation for museum education 
in response to COVID-19. New England 
Museum Association. 2021;12:2021
[44] Fletcher TS, Wiskera ES, 
Wilbur LH, Garcia NM. The sensory totes 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
18
programme: Sensory-friendly autism 
program innovations designed to meet 
COVID-19 challenges. World Federation 
of Occupational Therapists Bulletin. 
2022;78(1):44-52
[45] Podsukhina E, Smith MK, 
Pinke-Sziva I. A critical evaluation of 
mobile guided tour apps: Motivators and 
inhibitors for tour guides and customers. 
Tourism and Hospitality Research. 
2022;22(4):14673584211055819
[46] Manik HF, Christanti R, Setiawan W.  
Knowledge management and community-
based enterprise: An initiative to preserve 
the shadow puppet traditional knowledge 
in Yogyakarta, Indonesia. VINE Journal of 
Information and Knowledge Management 
Systems. Emerald Publishing Limited. 
2022. DOI: 10.1108/VJIKMS-11-2021-0265 
[Vol. and No. ahead-of-print]
[47] Sabiescu A, Charatzopoulou K. 
Shaping a culture of lifelong learning 
for young audiences: A case study on the 
samsung digital discovery centre at the 
British museum. RICHES EU Project 
Deliverable. 04 Jan 2015;5(1):1-33
[48] Dohoney R. The Chicago sound 
show at the smart museum of art, the 
University of Chicago. Sound Studies. 
2020;6(2):271-274
[49] Korzun DG, Marchenkov SA, 
Vdovenko AS, Petrina OB. A semantic 
approach to designing information 
services for smart museums. 
International Journal of Embedded and 
Real-Time Communication Systems 
(IJERTCS). 2016;7(2):15-34
[50] Eardley AF, Mineiro C, Neves J, 
Ride P. Redefining access: Embracing 
multimodality, memorability and shared 
experience in museums. Curator: The 
Museum Journal. 2016;59(3):263-286
[51] Bruner J, Bruner JS. Acts of Meaning: 
Four Lectures on Mind and Culture. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press; 1990
[52] Pujol L, Roussou M, Poulou S, Balet O, 
Vayanou M, Ioannidis Y. Personalizing 
interactive digital storytelling in 
archaeological museums: The CHESS 
project. In: 40th Annual Conference of 
Computer Applications and Quantitative 
Methods in Archaeology. Amsterdam, 
Holland: Amsterdam University Press; 
2012. pp. 93-100
[53] Gray CA. Social stories and comic 
strip conversations with students 
with Asperger syndrome and high-
functioning autism. In: Asperger 
Syndrome or High-Functioning Autism? 
Boston, MA: Springer; 1998. pp. 167-198
[54] Mitchell AW, Moore EM, 
Roberts EJ, Hachtel KW, Brown MS. 
Sensory processing disorder in children 
ages birth–3 years born prematurely: 
A systematic review. The American 
Journal of Occupational Therapy. 
2015;69(1):6901220030p1-1
[55] Kinnealey M, Koenig KP, 
Smith S. Relationships between sensory 
modulation and social supports and 
health-related quality of life. The 
American Journal of Occupational 
Therapy. 2011;65(3):320-327
[56] Ben-Sasson A, Hen L, Fluss R, 
Cermak SA, Engel-Yeger B, Gal E. A 
meta-analysis of sensory modulation 
symptoms in individuals with autism 
spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders. 
2009;39(1):1-1
[57] Crane L, Goddard L, 
Pring L. Sensory processing in adults 
with autism spectrum disorders. Autism. 
2009;13(3):215-228
[58] Neufeld J, Hederos Eriksson L, 
Hammarsten R, Lundin Remnélius K, 

Museums and the Metaverse: Emerging Technologies to Promote Inclusivity and Engagement
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.110044
19
Tillmann J, Isaksson J, et al. The impact 
of atypical sensory processing on 
adaptive functioning within and beyond 
autism: The role of familial factors. 
Autism. 2021;25(8):2341-2355
[59] Murray M, Baker PH, 
Murray-Slutsky C, Paris B. Strategies for 
supporting the sensory-based learner. 
Preventing School Failure: Alternative 
Education for Children and Youth. 
2009;53(4):245-252
[60] Rappolt-Schlichtmann G, Daley SG. 
Providing access to engagement in 
learning: The potential of universal 
Design for Learning in museum 
design. Curator: The Museum Journal. 
2013;56(3):307-321
[61] Walker VL, Smith CG. Training 
paraprofessionals to support students 
with disabilities: A literature review. 
Exceptionality. 2015;23(3):170-191
[62] Ricciardelli D. A Social Skills 
Program Evaluation: Will Social Stories 
Combine with a Traditional Social Skills 
Curriculum Increase pro-Social Behavior 
in Autistic Children? Teaneck, NJ: 
Fairleigh Dickinson University; 2006
[63] Garzotto F, Matarazzo V,  
Messina N, Gelsomini M, Riva C. 
Improving museum accessibility through 
storytelling in wearable immersive 
virtual reality. In: 2018 3rd Digital 
Heritage International Congress 
(DigitalHERITAGE) Held Jointly with 2018 
24th International Conference on Virtual 
Systems & Multimedia (VSMM 2018). 
New York City, NY: IEEE; 2018. pp. 1-8
[64] Watermeyer R. A conceptualisation 
of the post-museum as pedagogical space. 
Journal of Science Communication. 
2012;11(1):A02
[65] Othman MK, Nogoibaeva A,  
Leong LS, Barawi MH. Usability 
evaluation of a virtual reality 
smartphone app for a living museum. 
Universal Access in the Information 
Society. 2022;21(4):995-1012
[66] Garzotto F, Gelsomini M, 
Matarazzo V, Messina N, Occhiuto D. 
Designing wearable immersive “social 
stories” for persons with 
neurodevelopmental disorder. In: 
International Conference on Universal 
Access in Human-Computer Interaction. 
Cham: Springer; 2018. pp. 517-529
[67] Josman N, Ben-Chaim HM, 
Friedrich S, Weiss PL. Effectiveness 
of virtual reality for teaching street-
crossing skills to children and adolescents 
with autism. International Journal on 
Disability and Human Development. 
2008;7(1):49-56
[68] Howard MC, Lee J. Pre-
training interventions to counteract 
seductive details in virtual reality 
training programs. Human 
Resource Development Quarterly. 
2020;31(1):13-29
[69] Varriale L, Cuel R, Ravarini A,  
Briganti P, Minucci G. Smart and 
inclusive museums for visitors with 
autism: The app case “a dip in the blue”. 
In: Sustainable Digital Transformation. 
New York City, New York: Springer; 2023. 
pp. 133-152, Cham
[70] Olaz X, Garcia R, Ortiz A, 
Marichal S, Villadangos J, Ardaiz O, 
et al. An interdisciplinary Design of 
an Interactive Cultural Heritage Visit 
for In-situ, mixed reality and affective 
experiences. Multimodal Technologies 
and Interaction. 2022;6(7):59
[71] Gallace A, Ngo MK, 
Sulaitis J, Spence C. Multisensory 
presence in virtual reality: Possibilities 
& limitations. In: Multiple Sensorial 
Media Advances and Applications: New 

Application of Modern Trends in Museums
20
Developments in MulSeMedia. Hershey, 
Pennsylvania: IGI Global; 2012. pp. 1-38
[72] Melo M, Gonçalves G,  
Monteiro P, Coelho H, Vasconcelos- 
Raposo J, Bessa M. Do multisensory 
stimuli benefit the virtual reality 
experience? A systematic review. 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization 
and Computer Graphics. 01 Feb 
2022;28(2):1428-1442
[73] El-Sayyad N. Role of sensory 
maps in cultural planning to shape 
the future of deteriorated heritage 
sites. In: 8th International Conference 
“ARCHCAIRO8:” Building the Future 
“Now”–Rights to Better Living. 
Architecture and Contexts; 2019. 
pp. 8-10
[74] Quercia D, Schifanella R, Aiello LM, 
McLean K. Smelly maps: The digital life 
of urban smellscapes. In: Proceedings 
of the International AAAI Conference 
on Web and Social Media. Vol. 9, 
No. 1. Oxford, United Kingdom. 2015. 
pp. 327-336
[75] Pietroni E, Adami A. Interacting 
with virtual reconstructions in museums: 
The Etruscanning project. Journal 
on Computing and Cultural Heritage 
(JOCCH). 2014;7(2):1-29
[76] Roussou M, Pujol L, Balet O, 
Poulou S. Personalizing interactive 
digital storytelling in archaeological 
museums: The CHESS project. In: 
Computer Applications and Quantitative 
Methods in Archaeology (CAA) 2012. 
Southampton, UK. 26-30 March 2012. 
p. 2011
[77] Baradaran RF. A model for 
sociocultural interactions in museums. 
Museum Management and Curatorship. 
2014;29(2):174-187

