IMPROVING USER EXPERIENCE IN THE MUSEUM 
Maria Claudia Buzzi1, Marina Buzzi1, Barbara Leporini2 and Gaetana Marchesini3 
1IIT-CNR, via Moruzzi 1, Pisa  
2ISTI-CNR, via Moruzzi 1, Pisa 
3IBAN-CNR, via Biblioteca 4, Catania 
ABSTRACT 
Today ICT can benefit any environment, including the safeguarding, preservation and empowerment of cultural heritage. 
Pervasive technologies such as mobile devices (smart phones and tablets), sensors and RFID (Radio-frequency 
identification) are flooding the real world, enabling new intelligent and easy-to-use services for everyone, including the 
differently-abled. RFID technology enables automatic identification of objects and has been successfully applied in 
museums to improve the museumgoer’s experience or to increase the efficiency of a physical inventory. In this paper we 
discuss using RFID passive technology to identify artifacts in the museum and deliver content description in the most 
appropriate form through various sensorial channels, according to the user’s abilities. Specifically, we describe the initial 
steps of a project aimed at creating mobile apps to facilitate the usability of museum visits for differently-abled and 
special-needs users. 
KEYWORDS 
Museum, RFID, user experience, accessibility, usability, users with special needs 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the last two decades the Internet has changed our society profoundly. The World Wide Web with its 
simple user interface and link mechanism has brought the user into the net, providing transparent access to 
the enormous amount of data available worldwide in servers and databases. ICT technology has 
revolutionized the way products and services are provided; eGovernment, eLearning, eCommerce, eHealth, 
etc., are the new paradigms made possible by the Web, in some cases allowing the simplification of processes 
and procedures, but mainly creating new ways of interaction aimed at generating a more satisfying user 
experience.  
Today, RFID and sensor technologies embedded in everyday objects promise to further revolutionize our 
society. In the near future, everyday objects would be able to provide information related to their 
characteristics or usage. All this information, transmitted via network, may trigger intelligent services 
available everywhere and under any conditions, so RFID has become one of the potential key technologies 
for enabling “object-based” services. One advantage of RFID compared to other technologies such as QR 
codes (Quick Response Code) or barcode, is that it does not require sight, enabling its use for blind persons 
as well. RFID technology has two components, readers and tags. Tags store object identification information 
that readers can retrieve. Tags can be battery powered, but the most interesting are passive tags that take 
advantage of the energy induced by the reader and are small, cheap and long-lasting. 
In order to provide a more satisfying user experience for museum visitors, including differently-abled 
persons, flexible adaptive services should be provided to dynamically convert content to a more suitable 
format, or one preferred by the user. In fact, as argued by Kelly et al., in the eLearning field rather than 
provide universal access for the same resource, the equivalence of the content provided using different 
sensory channels (i.e., touch, sight, or hearing) is important. The idea behind the 'Museum for All' (M4A) 
project is to deliver information about artifacts during a visit to the museum in an accessible way. RFID 
technology provides personalized content considering the diversity of needs of all users, not only the 
differently-abled; for instance, to make the experience more usable, interactive paths could be provided for 
children: learning by experimenting and gaming may enhance learning.  
IADIS International Conferences Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction and 
Game and Entertainment Technologies 2013
327

Special attention will be given to the design of content delivery; if a person has reduced perception or 
other disabilities, the pervasiveness of technologies may create barriers if information and services are not 
designed according to accessibility and usability principles. Universal access refers to the possibility of 
delivering content and services to everyone, including differently-abled people. Since disabilities embrace a 
wide range -- perceptual, motor, learning and cognitive -- the Museum for all project aims to offer 
information on artifacts through various channels: visual, auditory, vibro-tactile, etc. Furthermore, children 
should access different levels of information according their developmental age. Thus, the information is 
organized by levels of increasing difficulty managed by the system adaptation features. Providing any type of 
information through mobile devices and applications can be a valuable way to differentiate content according 
to the users’ characteristics. Recently, mobile devices and applications have been also become accessible to 
people with special needs, such the blind and the visually-impaired (e.g., iPad, iphone Apple devices 
enhanced with Siri synthesis, Google Talkback app, for Android devices). In addition, certain special devices 
designed especially for blind users (http://www.bones.ch/bones/pages/eng/products/milestone312.html) are 
able to read RFID tag contents without a specific application. 
The paper is organized as follows: after presenting related work in the field, the museum domain is 
introduced to apply our proposal, which will be described next. Conclusions end the paper.  
2. RELATED WORK 
In the last decade pervasive computing and localization technologies have been increasingly applied in 
several areas, including cultural heritage. Recently multimodal mobile environments and vibrotactile devices 
with touchscreens have advanced human-computer interaction, improving the user experience through more 
natural interaction. Many museum applications have been developed and we only report some of them here, 
selecting studies most similar to our work. RFID (Radio-Frequency Identifier) technology has been 
successfully applied in museums in order to improve visitors’ experience. Based on HF (high frequency) 
readers/tags, Hsi et al. developed the eXspot system, which enables visitors to capture information about 
exhibits they visit and to take souvenir photographs during their visit to the museum. Furthermore, they can 
access the exhibit information on personalized Web pages (His et al., 2005). 
Santoro et al. developed a multimodal museum guide offering various accessibility options to users, 
fitting and supporting the needs and preferences of different users, including the visually impaired. An initial 
empirical evaluation showed overall good acceptance among users, but the use of HF forced users to stand in 
very close proximity to the artworks, which is not very natural in the museum environment. The authors 
fixed the problem using active RFID tags, which can reach a longer range and at the same time provide a 
localization of the current user position without forcing them to stand in close proximity to the artwork 
(Santoro et al., 2007). However, they used active tags that are expensive and require maintenance (battery 
powered) while we selected passive UHF tags since that are small, cheap and with a potentially infinite life. 
Hall and al. (Hall and al., 2002) developed an application for children to combine replicas of antique toys, 
accessing multimedia information about the artifacts and playing different music according to different levels 
of content, depending on the object combinations.  
Recently Near Field Communication (NFC), a radio-frequency based wireless technology, has been 
incorporated into modern smart phones such as Android and ios devices, offering new interaction 
opportunities. Ceipidor et al. investigate the use of NFC technologies to enhance user experience by 
retrieving additional contents and accessing social activities using a smart phone (Ceipidor et al., 2013). 
Participatory Design (PD) techniques are a key factors in the design process since they enable the production 
of artifacts and services fully usable by users. (Cober et al., 2012) applied PD techniques to simplify 
interaction for the blind user and improve his/her experience in the museum.  
Another branch of research focuses on enriching and adapting user experience, also benefitting from 
social activities. Karimi et al. (2012) investigated recommender systems for museums, by “sniffing” the 
surrounding environment using the RFID technology. Similarly, Mody et al. 2009 exploited RFID and 
adapted recommender systems for personalizing platforms for the museum. However, to observe user 
activities may pose privacy and security issues that must be carefully analyzed.  
 
ISBN: 978-972-8939-90-8 © 2013 IADIS
328

Concerning social activities, sharing creates interest: attracting people to the exhibition, and allowing 
people who miss the visit to still enjoy it. Kostoska et al. (2013) investigate how to promote the sharing of 
memories, after a visit to a museum or exhibition, by performing surveys and trials. Results indicated that 
users can significantly enhance this sharing when they have simple and easy-to-use tools for building a 
collection of photos of their visit, supporting their storytelling. 
3. THE MUSEUM FOR ALL  
The Museum for All (M4A) is a project aimed at organizing content description of artifacts present in a 
museum. The idea is to provide accessible information according to user ability in order to offer a level of 
knowledge suited to each individual. The RFID tag applied to an artifact enables the delivery of the 
description of the characteristics and historical details associated with it, according to the personalization of 
the content configured via web (before the visit). When the user is in proximity to the artifact, the content can 
be delivered automatically or on-demand, depending on user preference. The content is delivered through one 
or more channels (visual, auditory, haptic, etc.) according to rules described in the next subsection. A simple 
user profile is selected before or when starting the visit. According to the selected profile, different amounts 
of information are presented in a fully usable way with different sensory modalities. For instance, when the 
children’s profile is selected, the language used for providing content is simplified and the description 
shortened. A sort of game may be proposed, making the child receive an image of the artifact that can be 
zoomed, highlighting details and putting the artifact into its historic-artistic context. Serious games are a new 
and active research topic that investigates the potential of games for learning and stimulating brain activities.  
3.1 Designing the Content 
The information related to the museum collections is usually stored in a database. Recently artifact 
descriptions have been made available via wireless networks to visitors using mobile guides (Ghiani et al., 
2008). However, little attention has been devoted to personalizing user experience according to different user 
abilities. Systems able to adapt the content as well as the user interfaces may be a possible solution for 
providing suitable information to any type of user. This type of methodology has characterized our design 
approach.  
Adaptive systems may operate statically, reading configuration files, and/or be dynamically based on user 
behavior and feedback. In the context of our project, the configuration is mainly static but the rhythm of the 
delivered content can be adapted according to the rapidity of the user’s interaction (i.e., clicking a button, 
making gestures, etc.) while the other adaptations are performed reading configuration files.  
When conventional museums are arranged to become accessible for all, these design principles for 
delivering content related to artifacts should be followed as much as possible. Furthermore, to enrich user 
experience, multimedia interaction with the artifact should be provided, possibly simulating the real 
experience with an augmented virtual environment interaction provided through electronic mobile devices 
such as a tablet, which with its touchscreen interface offers more natural and intuitive interaction. 
A museum designed for children should be different from conventional museums, offering large spaces 
where children can run, and artifacts -- or virtual copies of them – that can be touched and experimented 
with, offering a multisensory experience that enables the child to learn by experience (Dindler et al., 2010). 
Offering performances with actors can immerse the child in a typical historical scenario. In addition, a user 
interface designed for a child will be very different from those targeting visually-impaired users (e.g., with 
fewer graphical objects and more textual content).  
Table 1 shows the content adaptation rules that drive the content delivery.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IADIS International Conferences Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction and 
Game and Entertainment Technologies 2013
329

Table 1. Adaptation Rules for Driving the Content Delivery 
Reduced/ missing ability Content 
Delivery channels 
Visual 
Add a detailed description of 
the article, provide tactile user 
interaction (gesture) and 
vibrotactile feedback  
Auditory, vibrotactile  
Hearing 
Motor 
Cognitive 
 
Learning 
Children 
Simplified language 
Modified User Interfaces (UIs)  
Content by levels, Simplified 
language 
Content by levels 
Content by levels, Simplified 
language, Modified UI  
Visual 
Visual, auditory 
Visual, auditory 
 
Visual, auditory 
Visual, auditory, 
tactile 
3.2 System Architecture 
The database of information related to a museum’s collections will be enlarged with the additional 
information necessary for delivery via different channels, for instance adding the description related to visual 
content and structuring it in at least two different levels of information (one simplified version and a 
complete one). Different users profiles according to Table 1 will be created and stored. A web application 
will allow users to register themselves and choose a suitable user profile, specifying the user preferences. A 
profile manager will select and organize the information according to user preferences. A key feature of the 
usability of the M4A system is its portability. Thus, the user should be provided with a mobile phone or 
tablet touchscreen equipped with an RFID reader operating at high frequency. When the RFID reader reads 
an artifact tag, the M4A web application will provide the information according to the user’s preferences, 
allowing interaction through the touchscreen devices. We have selected the Web architecture because it is 
multiplatform and device-independent.  
We are developing our prototype on the Android platform, which offers an open development 
environment and can also lead to potential improvements suggested by the international developer 
community. In order to better design for content that will be presented to different users, a participatory 
design approach involving people with disabilities will be undertaken from the early phase of the design. 
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Museums are places of culture where people expand their knowledge. Everyone should have the opportunity 
to benefit from them. Developing content that is fully accessible and usable for all remains a challenge, but 
the careful development of new systems and services for special needs users is possible. 
The advantage of the “Museum for All” (M4A) system is that it provides everyone with accessible and 
suitable content related to museum artifacts. Its design approach could be followed and utilized in other 
application contexts to take into account the needs of differently-abled persons.  
Access to cultural heritage is a right for all, and simple and feasible ways to facilitate this should be 
explored. In this paper we have presented the idea of the “Museum for All” project and we introduced its 
main basic architectural characteristics. The idea proposed herein could be integrated into online systems for 
reservation/purchase of Museum tickets, providing a more satisfying user experience for all.  
Future work will address the implementation of a prototype designed applying the principles of 
participatory design, to be tested with differently abled users. 
 
 
 
 
ISBN: 978-972-8939-90-8 © 2013 IADIS
330

REFERENCES 
Ceipidor, U.B., Medaglia, C.M., Volpi, V.,  Moroni, A.,  Sposato, S., Carboni, M., Caridi, A., 2013. NFC technology 
applied to touristic-cultural field: A case study on an Italian museum. Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop 
on Near Field Communication (NFC). 
Cober, R., Au, O. and Son J.J., 2012. Using a participatory approach to design a technology-enhanced museum tour for 
visitors who are blind. Proceedings of the 2012 iConference (iConference '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 592-
594. DOI=10.1145/2132176.2132301 
Dindler, C., Iversen, O.S., Smith, R., and Veerasawmy, R. 2010. Participatory design at the museum: inquiring into 
children's everyday engagement in cultural heritage. Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the Computer-Human 
Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia (OZCHI '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 72-79. 
Ghiani, G., Leporini, B., Paternò F., Santoro,C., 2008, Exploiting RFIDs and Tilt-Based Interaction for Mobile Museum 
Guides Accessible to Vision-Impaired Users, Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Computers Helping 
People with Special Needs. Linz, Austria, LNCS, Vol. 5105/2008, pp. 1070 – 1077. 
Hall, T., Ciolfi, L., Hickey, N., Bannon, L., 2002, From hands-on to minds-on: toward the design of interaction and 
technology to enhance children's learning in a museum, Proceedings of ICLS02, International Conference of 
Learning. Seattle, USA,  
Hsi, S., Fait, H., 2005, RFID enhances visitors' museum experience at the San Francisco Exploratorium. Communications 
of the ACM, Vol. 48, No.9, pp. 60 – 65.  
Karimi, R., Nanopoulos, A., Schmidt-Thieme, L., 2012. RFID-Enhanced Museum for Interactive Experience. Springer 
Multimedia for Cultural Heritage Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 247, pp 192-205. 
Kelly, B., Phipps, L., Howell, C.: Implementing a holistic approach to e-Learning accessibility. Retrieved Dec 2012 at 
http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/web-focus/papers/alt-c-2005/accessibility-elearning-paper.doc 
Kostoska, G., Fezzi, D., Valeri, B., Baez, M., Casati, F., Caliari, S. and Tarter, S., 2013. Collecting memories of the 
museum experience. In CHI '13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '13). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 247-252. 
Mody, A., Akram, M. ; Rony, K. ; Aman, M.S. ; Kamoua, R., 2009 Enhancing user experience at museums using smart 
phones with RFID. Proceedings of the Systems, Applications and Technology Conference. LISAT '09. IEEE Long 
Island, pp. 1-5. 
Santoro, C., Paternò, F., Ricci, G., Leporini, B., 2007. A Multimodal Mobile Museum Guide for All, Proceedings of the 
9th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (Mobile HCI'07), 
Singapore, pp. 21-25. 
 
IADIS International Conferences Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction and 
Game and Entertainment Technologies 2013
331

